
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74976 ***

[Illustration: _H. Edrige delt._

_T. Dickinson sculpt._

_Mr. M. Park._

_Publish’d April 5.1799, by G. Nicol, Pall Mall._]


                                TRAVELS                                 
                                 IN THE                                 
                     INTERIOR DISTRICTS OF AFRICA:                      
                          PERFORMED UNDER THE                           
                        DIRECTION AND PATRONAGE                         
                                 OF THE                                 
                          AFRICAN ASSOCIATION,                          
                                 IN THE                                 
                      YEARS 1795, 1796, AND 1797.                       

                        BY MUNGO PARK, SURGEON.                         

                                  WITH                                  
                              AN APPENDIX,                              
                               CONTAINING                               
                  GEOGRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATIONS OF AFRICA                  

                           BY MAJOR RENNELL.                            

                               * * * * *                                
                ------egens Libyæ deserta peragro. VIRG.                
                               * * * * *                                

                                LONDON:                                 
              PRINTED BY W. BULMER AND CO. FOR THE AUTHOR;              
        AND SOLD BY G. AND W. NICOL, BOOKSELLERS TO HIS MAJESTY,        
                            PALL-MALL. 1799.                            




                                 TO THE                                 
                        NOBLEMEN AND GENTLEMEN,                         
                ASSOCIATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF EXPLORING                 
                                  THE                                   
                      INTERIOR REGIONS OF AFRICA,                       
                                  THIS                                  
                           JOURNAL OF TRAVELS                           
                           ON THAT CONTINENT,                           
                    PERFORMED UNDER THEIR PATRONAGE,                    
                                  IS,                                   
                           WITH ALL HUMILITY,                           
                               INSCRIBED,                               
                           BY THEIR FAITHFUL                            
                      AND OBLIGED HUMBLE SERVANT,                       

  _April 10th_, 1799.                                      MUNGO PARK.




                                PREFACE.                                
                               * * * * *                                


The following Journal, drawn up from original minutes and notices
made at the proper moment and preserved with great difficulty, is now
offered to the Public by the direction of my noble and honourable
employers, the Members of the African Association. I regret that
it is so little commensurate to the patronage I have received. As
a composition, it has nothing to recommend it, but _truth_. It is
a plain, unvarnished tale; without pretensions of any kind, except
that it claims to enlarge, in some degree, the circle of African
geography. For this purpose, my services were offered, and accepted
by the Association; and, I trust, I have not laboured altogether in
vain. The work, however, must speak for itself; and I should not
have thought any preliminary observations necessary, if I did not
consider myself called upon, both by justice and gratitude, to offer
those which follow.

Immediately after my return from Africa, the acting Committee of
the Association,1 taking notice of the time it would require to
prepare an account in detail, as it now appears; and being desirous
of gratifying, as speedily as possible, the curiosity which many
of the Members were pleased to express concerning my discoveries,
determined that an epitome, or abridgment of my travels, should be
forthwith prepared from such materials and oral communications as I
could furnish, and printed for the use of the Association; and also,
that an engraved Map of my route should accompany it. A memoir,
thus supplied and improved, was accordingly drawn up in two parts,
by Members of the Association, and distributed among the Society:
the first part consisting of a narrative, in abstract, of my travels,
by Bryan Edwards, Esq.; the second, of Geographical Illustrations of
my progress, by Major James Rennell, F.R.S. Major Rennell was pleased
also to add, not only a Map of my route, constructed in conformity
to my own observations and sketches (when freed from those errors,
which the Major’s superior knowledge, and distinguished accuracy
in geographical researches, enabled him to discover and correct), but
also a General Map, shewing the progress of discovery, and improvement
in the Geography of North Africa; together with a Chart of the lines
of magnetic variation, in the seas around that immense continent.

Availing myself therefore, on the present occasion, of assistance
like this, it is impossible that I can present myself before the
Public, without expressing how deeply and gratefully sensible I am
of the honour and advantage which I derive from the labours of those
Gentlemen; for Mr. Edwards has kindly permitted me to incorporate, as
occasion offered, the whole of his narrative into different parts of
my work; and Major Rennell, with equal good will, allows me not only
to embellish and elucidate my Travels, with the Maps beforementioned,
but also to subjoin his Geographical Illustrations _entire_.

Thus aided and encouraged, I should deliver this volume to the world,
with that confidence of a favourable reception, which no merits
of my own could authorize me to claim; were I not apprehensive
that expectations have been formed, by some of my subscribers, of
discoveries to be unfolded, which I have not made, and of wonders to
be related, of which I am utterly ignorant. There is danger that those
who feel a disappointment of this nature, finding less to astonish
and amuse in my book, than they had promised to themselves beforehand,
will not even allow me the little merit which I really possess. Painful
as this circumstance may prove to my feelings, I shall console myself
under it, if the distinguished persons, under whose auspices I entered
on my mission, shall allow that I have executed the duties of it to
their satisfaction; and that they consider the Journal which I have now
the honour to present to them, to be, what I have endeavoured to make
it, an honest and faithful report of my proceedings and observations
in their service, from the outset of my journey to its termination.

M. P.


[Footnote 1: This Committee consists of the following Noblemen and
Gentlemen; Earl of Moira, Lord Bishop of Landaff, Right Hon. Sir Joseph
Banks, President of the Royal Society; Andrew Stewart, Esq. F.R.S. and
Bryan Edwards, Esq. F.R.S. Concerning the original institution of
the Society itself, and the progress of discovery, previous to my
expedition, the fullest information has already been given in the
various publications which the Society have caused to be made.]




                               CONTENTS.                                
                               * * * * *                                


                               CHAPTER I.                               
  
  _The Author’s Motives for undertaking the Voyage — his 
  Instructions and Departure — arrives at Jillifree, on the 
  Gambia River — proceeds to Vintain. — Some Account of the 
  Feloops. — Proceeds up the River for Jonkakonda — arrives 
  at Dr. Laidley’s. — Some Account of Pisania, and the 
  British Factory established at that Place. — The Author’s 
  Employment during his Stay at Pisania — his Sickness and 
  Recovery — the Country described — prepares to set out for 
  the Interior._                                                _page_ 1
  
                              CHAPTER II.                               
  
  _Description of the Feloops, the Jaloffs, the Foulahs, and 
  Mandingoes. — Some Account of the Trade between the Nations 
  of Europe and the Natives of Africa by the Way of the 
  Gambia, and between the Native Inhabitants of the Coast and 
  the Nations of the interior Countries — their Mode of 
  selling and buying, &c._                                       _p._ 15
  
                              CHAPTER III.                              
  
  _The Author sets out from Pisania — his Attendants — 
  reaches Jindey. — Story related by a Mandingo Negro. — 
  Proceeds to Medina, the Capital of Woolli. — Interview with 
  the King. — Saphies or Charms. — Proceeds to Kolor. — 
  Description of Mumbo Jumbo — arrives at Koojar — wrestling 
  Match. — Crosses the Wilderness, and arrives at Tallika, in 
  the Kingdom of Bondou._                                        _p._ 29
  
                              CHAPTER IV.                               
  
  _Some Account of the Inhabitants of Tallika. — The Author 
  proceeds for Fatteconda — Incidents on the Road. — Crosses 
  the Neriko, arrives at Koorkarany — reaches the River 
  Falemé — Fishery on that River — proceeds along its Bank to 
  Naye or Nayemow — crosses the Falemé and arrives at 
  Fatteconda. — Has an Interview with Almami, the Sovereign 
  of Bondou. — Description of the King’s Dwelling — has a 
  second Interview with the King, who begs the Author’s Coat. 
  — Author visits the King’s Wives — is permitted to depart 
  on friendly Terms. — Journey by Night — arrives at Joag. — 
  Some Account of Bondou and its Inhabitants the 
  Foulahs._                                                      _p._ 46
  
                               CHAPTER V.                               
  
  _Account of Kajaaga. — Serawoollies — their Manners and 
  Language. — Account of Joag. — The Author is ill treated, 
  and robbed of half of his Effects, by Order of Batcheri, 
  the King. — Charity of a female Slave. — The Author is 
  visited by Demba Sego, Nephew of the King of Kasson, who 
  offers to conduct him in safety to that Kingdom. — Offer 
  accepted. — The Author and his Protector, with a numerous 
  Retinue, set out and reach Samee, on the Banks of the 
  Senegal. — Proceed to Kayee, and crossing the Senegal, 
  arrive in the Kingdom of Kasson._                              _p._ 63
  
                              CHAPTER VI.                               
  
  _Arrival at Teesee. — Interview with Tiggity Sego, the 
  King’s Brother — the Author’s detention at Teesee — some 
  Account of that Place and its Inhabitants — incidents which 
  occurred there. — Rapacious Conduct of Tiggity Sego towards 
  the Author on his Departure. — Sets out for Kooniakary, the 
  Capital of the Kingdom. — Incidents on the Road, and 
  Arrival at Kooniakary._                                        _p._ 74
  
                              CHAPTER VII.                              
  
  _The Author admitted to an Audience of the King of Kasson, 
  whom he finds well disposed towards him. — Incidents during 
  the Author’s Stay at Kooniakary. — Departs thence for 
  Kemmoo, the Capital of Kaarta. — Is received with great 
  Kindness by the King of Kaarta, who dissuades him from 
  prosecuting his Journey, on Account of approaching 
  Hostilities with the King of Bambarra. — The Author 
  determines, notwithstanding, to proceed; and the usual 
  Routes being obstructed, takes the Path to Ludamar, a 
  Moorish Kingdom. — Is accommodated by the King with a Guide 
  to Jarra, the frontier Town of the Moorish Territories; and 
  sets out for that Place, accompanied by three of the King’s 
  Sons, and 200 Horsemen._                                       _p._ 85
  
                             CHAPTER VIII.                              
  
  _Journey from Kemmoo to Funingkedy. — Some Account of the 
  Lotus. — A Youth murdered by the Moors — interesting Scene 
  at his Death. — Author passes through Simbing. — Some 
  Particulars concerning Major Houghton. — Author reaches 
  Jarra — Situation of the surrounding States at the Period 
  of his Arrival there, and a brief Account of the War 
  between Kaarta and Bambarra._                                  _p._ 98
  
                              CHAPTER IX.                               
  
  _Some Account of Jarra, and the Moorish Inhabitants. — The 
  Author applies for, and obtains Permission from Ali, the 
  Moorish Chief or Sovereign of Ludamar, to pass through his 
  Territories. — Departs from Jarra, and arrives at Deena — 
  ill treated by the Moors. — Proceeds to Sampaka — finds a 
  Negro who makes Gunpowder. — Continues his Journey to 
  Samee, where he is seized by some Moors who are sent for 
  that Purpose by Ali — is conveyed a Prisoner to the Moorish 
  Camp at Benowm, on the Borders of the Great Desert._          _p._ 111
  
                               CHAPTER X.                               
  
  _Various Occurrences during the Author’s Confinement at 
  Benowm — is visited by some Moorish Ladies. — A Funeral and 
  Wedding. — The Author receives an extraordinary Present 
  from the Bride. — Other Circumstances illustrative of the 
  Moorish Character and Manners._                               _p._ 126
  
                              CHAPTER XI.                               
  
  _Occurrences at the Camp continued. — Information collected 
  by the Author, concerning Houssa and Tombuctoo; and the 
  situation of the latter. — The Route described from Morocco 
  to Benowm. — The Author’s Distress from Hunger. — Ali 
  removes his Camp to the Northward. — The Author is carried 
  Prisoner to the new Encampment, and is presented to Queen 
  Fatima. — Great Distress from the Want of Water._             _p._ 138
  
                              CHAPTER XII.                              
  
  _Containing some further miscellaneous Reflections on the 
  Moorish Character, and Manners. — Observations concerning 
  the Great Desert, its Animals, wild and domestic, &c. 
  &c._                                                          _p._ 149
  
                             CHAPTER XIII.                              
  
  _Ali departs for Jarra, and the Author allowed to follow 
  him thither. — The Author’s faithful Servant, Demba, is 
  seized by Ali’s Order, and sent back into Slavery. — Ali 
  returns to his Camp, and permits the Author to remain at 
  Jarra, who, thenceforward, meditates his Escape. — Daisy, 
  King of Kaarta, approaching with his Army towards Jarra, 
  the Inhabitants quit the town, and the Author accompanies 
  them in their Flight. — A Party of Moors overtake him at 
  Queira. — He gets away from them at Daybreak: — is again 
  pursued by another Party, and robbed; but finally effects 
  his Escape._                                                  _p._ 161
  
                              CHAPTER XIV.                              
  
  _The Author feels great Joy at his Deliverance, and 
  proceeds through the Wilderness, E.S.E.; but finds his 
  Situation very deplorable. — Suffers greatly from Thirst, 
  and faints on the Sand: — recovers, and makes another 
  Effort to push forward. Is providentially relieved by a 
  Fall of Rain. — Arrives at a Foulah Village, where he is 
  refused Relief by the Dooty; but obtains Food from a poor 
  Woman. — Continues his Journey through the Wilderness, and 
  the next Day lights on another Foulah Village, where he is 
  hospitably received by one of the Shepherds. — Arrives on 
  the third Day at a Negro Town called Wawra, tributary to 
  the King of Bambarra._                                        _p._ 175
  
                              CHAPTER XV.                               
  
  _The Author proceeds to Wassiboo — is joined by some 
  fugitive Kaartans, who accompany him in his Route through 
  Bambarra. — Discovers the Niger. — Some Account of Sego, 
  the Capital of Bambarra. — Mansong, the King, refuses to 
  see the Author, but sends him a Present. — Great 
  Hospitality of a Negro Woman._                                _p._ 185
  
                              CHAPTER XVI.                              
  
  _Departure from Sego, and Arrival at Kabba. — Description 
  of the Shea, or vegetable Butter Tree. — The Author and his 
  Guide arrive at Sansanding. Behaviour of the Moors at that 
  Place. — The Author pursues his Journey to the Eastward. — 
  Incidents on the Road. — Arrives at Modiboo, and proceeds 
  for Kea; but obliged to leave his Horse by the Way. — 
  Embarks at Kea in a Fisherman’s Canoe for Moorzan; is 
  conveyed from thence across the Niger to Silla. — 
  Determines to proceed no further Eastward. — Some Account 
  of the further Course of the Niger, and the Towns in its 
  Vicinage, towards the East._                                  _p._ 201
  
                             CHAPTER XVII.                              
  
  _The Author returns Westward — arrives at Modiboo, and 
  recovers his Horse — finds great Difficulty in travelling, 
  in consequence of the Rains, and the overflowing of the 
  River; — is informed that the King of Bambarra had sent 
  Persons to apprehend him: — avoids Sego, and prosecutes his 
  Journey along the Banks of the Niger. — Incidents on the 
  Road. — Cruelties attendant on African Wars. — The Author 
  crosses the River Frina, and arrives at Taffara._             _p._ 218
  
                             CHAPTER XVIII.                             
  
  _Inhospitable Reception at Taffara. — A Negro Funeral at 
  Sooha. — The Author continues his Route through several 
  Villages along the Banks of the Niger, until he comes to 
  Koolikorro. — Supports himself by writing_ Saphies — 
  _reaches Maraboo — loses the Road; and after many 
  Difficulties arrives at Bammakoo. — Takes the Road for 
  Sibidooloo — meets with great Kindness at a Village called 
  Kooma; — is afterwards robbed, stripped, and plundered by 
  Banditti. — The Author’s Resource and Consolation under 
  exquisite Distress. — He arrives in Safety at 
  Sibidooloo._                                                  _p._ 233
  
                              CHAPTER XIX.                              
  
  _Government of Manding. — The Author’s Reception by the 
  Mansa, or chief Man of Sibidooloo, who takes Measures for 
  the Recovery of his Horse and Effects. — The Author removes 
  to Wanda; — great Scarcity, and its afflicting 
  Consequences. — The Author recovers his Horse and Clothes — 
  presents his Horse to the Mansa; and prosecutes his Journey 
  to Kamalia — some Account of that Town. — The Author’s kind 
  Reception by Karfa Taura, a Slatee, who proposes to go to 
  the Gambia in the next dry Season, with a Caravan of Slaves 
  — The Author’s Sickness, and Determination to remain and 
  accompany Karfa._                                             _p._ 245
  
                              CHAPTER XX.                               
  
  _Of the Climate and Seasons. — Winds. — Vegetable 
  Productions. — Population. — General Observations on the 
  Character and Disposition of the Mandingoes; and a summary 
  Account of their Manners and Habits of Life, their 
  Marriages, &c._                                               _p._ 258
  
                              CHAPTER XXI.                              
  
  _The Account of the Mandingoes continued. — Their Notions 
  in respect of the Planetary Bodies, and the Figure of the 
  Earth. — Their religious Opinions, and Belief in a Future 
  State. — Their Diseases and Methods of Treatment. — Their 
  Funeral Ceremonies, Amusements, Occupations, Diet, Arts, 
  Manufactures, &c._                                            _p._ 271
  
                             CHAPTER XXII.                              
  
  _Observations concerning the State and Sources of Slavery 
  in Africa._                                                   _p._ 287
  
                             CHAPTER XXIII.                             
  
  _Of Gold-dust, and the Manner in which it is collected. — 
  Process of Washing it. — Its Value in Africa. — Of Ivory. — 
  Surprise of the Negroes at the Eagerness of the Europeans 
  for this Commodity. — Scattered Teeth frequently picked up 
  in the Woods. — Mode of Hunting the Elephant. — Some 
  Reflections on the unimproved State of the Country, 
  &c._                                                          _p._ 299
  
                             CHAPTER XXIV.                              
  
  _Transactions at Kamalia resumed. — Arabic MSS. in Use 
  among the Mahomedan Negroes. — Reflections concerning the 
  Conversion and Education of the Negro Children. — Return of 
  the Author’s Benefactor, Karfa. — Further Account of the 
  Purchase and Treatment of Slaves. — Fast of Rhamadan how 
  observed by the Negroes. — Author’s anxiety for the Day of 
  Departure. — The Caravan sets out — Account of it on its 
  Departure, and Proceedings on the Road, until its Arrival 
  at Kinytakooro._                                              _p._ 313
  
                              CHAPTER XXV.                              
  
  _The Coffle crosses the Jallonka Wilderness. — Miserable 
  Fate of one of the female Slaves; — arrives at Sooseeta; — 
  proceeds to Manna. — Some Account of the Jalonkas. — 
  Crosses the main Stream of the Senegal. — Bridge of a 
  singular Construction. — Arrives at Malacotta. — Remarkable 
  Conduct of the King of the Jaloffs._                          _p._ 329
  
                             CHAPTER XXVI.                              
  
  _The Caravan proceeds to Konkodoo, and crosses the Falemé 
  River. — Its arrival at Baniserile, Kirwani, and 
  Tambacunda. — Incidents on the Road. A matrimonial Case. — 
  Specimen of the Shea Tree. — The Caravan proceeds through 
  many Towns and Villages, and arrives at length on the Banks 
  of Gambia. — passes through Medina, the Capital of Woolli, 
  and finally stops at Jindey. — The Author, accompanied by 
  Karfa, proceeds to Pisania. — Various Occurrences previous 
  to his Departure from Africa, — takes his Passage in an 
  American Ship. — Short Account of his Voyage to Great 
  Britain by the Way of the West Indies._                      _p._ 345.
  
                               APPENDIX.                                
  
                               CHAPTER I.                               
  
  _Concerning the Ideas entertained by the Ancient 
  Geographers, as well as the Moderns, down to the Times of 
  Delisle and D’Anville, respecting the Course of the River 
  Niger._                                                       page iii
  
                              CHAPTER II.                               
  
  _Concerning the Geographical Discoveries of Mr. Park._         p. xiii
  
                              CHAPTER III.                              
  
  _Construction of the Geography of Mr. Park’s Expedition 
  into Africa._                                                  p. xxii
  
                              CHAPTER IV.                               
  
  _The Construction of the Geography continued._                p. xxxvi
  
                               CHAPTER V.                               
  
  _Construction of the New Map of North Africa. — New 
  Arrangement of the Course of the Nile — Its distant 
  Fountain yet unexplored by Europeans. — A central Position 
  in Africa, determined. — Edrisi’s Line of Distance, 
  consistent. — Errors of Leo._                                    p. li
  
                              CHAPTER VI.                               
  
  _The Subject continued — Course of the River Niger, at 
  large — has no Communication with the Nile — Ptolemy’s 
  Description of it consistent._                                  p. lxx
  
                              CHAPTER VII.                              
  
  _Observations on the_ physical _and_ political _Geography 
  of North Africa — Naturally divisible into three Parts — 
  Productive in Gold — Boundary of the Moors and Negroes — 
  the_ Foulahs, _the_ Leucæthiopes _of the Ancients._          p. lxxxii




_The following_ AFRICAN WORDS, _recurring very frequently in the course
of the Narrative, it is thought necessary to prefix an Explanation
of them for the Reader’s convenience._

                               * * * * *                                

  _Mansa._ A king or chief governor.

  _Alkaid._ The head magistrate of a town or province, whose office
  is commonly hereditary.

  _Dooty._ Another name for the chief magistrate of a town or
  province: this word is used only in the interior countries.

  _Palaver._ A court of justice; a public meeting of any kind.

  _Bushreen._ A mussulman.

  _Kafir._ A Pagan native; an unbeliever.

  _Sonakee._ Another term for an unconverted native; it signifies
  one who drinks strong liquors, and is used by way of reproach.

  _Slatees._ Free black merchants, who trade chiefly in slaves.

  _Coffle_ or _Caffila._ A caravan of slaves, or a company of people
  travelling with any kind of merchandize.

  _Bar._ Nominal money; a single bar is equal in value to two
  shillings sterling, or thereabouts.

  _Minkalli._ A quantity of gold, nearly equal in value to ten
  shillings sterling.

  _Kowries._ Small shells, which pass for money in the Interior.

  _Korree._ A watering-place, where shepherds keep their cattle.

  _Bentang._ A sort of stage, erected in every town, answering the
  purpose of a town hall.

  _Baloon._ A room in which strangers are commonly lodged.

  _Soofroo._ A skin for containing water.

  _Saphie._ An amulet or charm.

  _Kouskous._ A dish prepared from boiled corn.

  _Shea-toulou._ Vegetable butter.

  _Calabash._ A species of gourd, of which the Negroes make bowls
  and dishes.

  _Paddle._ A sort of hoe used in husbandry.

                               * * * * *                                


                                ERRATA.                                 

Page 13, line 9, after the word _of_, insert _the_.

—— 18, the third line from the bottom, for _Mandigoes_, read
_Mandingoes_. This error occurs in some other places.

—— 20, line 6, after the word _as_, insert _counsel_.

—— 30, line 8, dele _and_.

—— 47, line 14, after _expression_, insert _even_.

—— 60, line 14, after _Prophet_ dele the period.

—— 91, third line from the bottom, after _difficulty_, insert _and_.

—— 136, line 4, dele _there_.

—— 261, third line from the bottom, for _is_, read _was_.

[Symbol] The _Mandingo_ language being merely oral, it sometimes
unavoidably happened to the Author, in reducing African terms to
writing, to express the same word differently, in different parts
of his journal. Thus, on revising his papers, he found _Jillifree_
and _Jillifrey_ used indiscriminately for the name of the same
town; and in like manner _Kinyeto_ and _Kenneyetoo_; _Cancaba_ and
_Kancaba_; _Tambacunda_ and _Tombaconda_; and some others. As this
was not observed until many of the sheets were printed, some of
these instances of inattention will be found in the ensuing work,
which it is hoped the good-natured reader will excuse. In cases of
doubt, the Map of the Author’s route is generally to be considered
as the best authority; and to that also he refers for the course and
distance of each day’s progress.




                          SUBSCRIBERS’ NAMES.                           
                               * * * * *                                


                         HIS MAJESTY’S LIBRARY.                         

  Abercorn, the most Noble the Marquis of

  Ailesbury, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Aylesford, the Rt. Hon. the Countess of

  Archer, the Rt. Hon. Lady

  Annesley, the Hon. Richard

  Anderson, Mr. James

  Archer, Edward, Esq.

  Ashton, Nicholas, Esq.

  Atkinson, Thomas, Esq.

  Arts, &c. the Society for the encouragement of

                                B.

  Buccleuch, his Grace the Duke of

  Buccleuch, her Grace the Dutchess of

  Banks, the Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph, Bart. K.B.

  Burges, Lady

  Bruhl, Count de

  Baillie, Dr.

  Baker, John, Esq.

  Baker, William, Esq.

  Balan, Mr.

  Bale, the Rev. Mr.

  Balfour, General James

  Baring, Sir Francis, Bart. M.P.

  Baring, J. Esq. M.P.

  Barker, Samuel, Esq.

  Barratt, Mr.

  Barrow, Mr. John

  Bathurst, the Rev. Charles

  Bedford, Charles, Esq.

  Bensley, William, Esq.

  Bickerdike, G. Esq.

  Biddulph, Charles, Esq.

  Bill, Charles, Esq.

  Birmingham, the Library at

  Blackburne, John, Esq.

  Blackeston, Mr.

  Blith, James, Esq.

  Boddington, S. Esq.

  Bonar, Mr. James

  Boosey, Mr.

  Boys, Mr. John

  Braithwaite, Daniel, Esq.

  Bramston, John, Esq.

  Brand, Mr.

  Bristol, the Library Society at

  Brodie, Alexander, Esq.

  Brompton, the Book Society of

  Brown, Mr. Thomas

  Bull, Mr.

  Burgh, William, Esq.

  Bush, F. Mr.

                                C.

  Chesterfield, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Chichester, the Bishop of

  Carnegie, Sir David, Bart.

  Cotton, Sir Charles, Bart.

  Cavendish, the Hon. Henry

  Carter, the Rev. John, M.A. and F.S.A.

  Chalmers, George, Esq.

  Clarke, Dr. James

  Claxton, ——, Esq.

  Cleeve, the Rev. Mr.

  Cockfield, Mr. Joseph

  Collins, David, Esq.

  Comings, Thomas Gray, Esq.

  Cooper, R. B. Esq.

  Cornwall, the County Library of

  Corser, the Rev. William

  Costeker, John, Esq.

  Coussmaker, Mr. W. K.

  Coxe, the Rev. Mr.

  Cracherode, the Rev. Mr.

  Creser, Mr. Thomas

  Crowe, James, Esq.

  Curtis, the Rev. Mr.

  Cure, Capel, Esq.

                                D.

  Dalkeith, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Durham, the Bishop of

  Douglas, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Dundas, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Dalrymple, Sir John, Bart.

  Drummond, William, Esq. M.P.

  Dalrymple, Alexander, Esq.

  Dalton, Mrs. Jane

  Dawson, John, Esq.

  Deacon, James, Esq.

  Deal, the Book Society at

  Denman, Dr.

  Dick, Mungo, Esq.

  Dickson, Mr. James

  Dickinson, Caleb, Esq.

  Dickenson, Rev. Samuel, LL.B.

  Disney, the Rev. Dr.

  Douce, Francis, Esq.

  Douglas, Andrew, Esq.

  Douglas, Miss

  Dulwich College, the Library of

                                E.

  Egremont, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Edwards, Bryan, Esq. M.P. F.R.S. and A.S.

  Edwards, Z. B. Esq.

  Ellis, George, Esq. M.P.

  Ellis, Charles, Esq. M.P.

  East, Mr.

  Eden, Robert, Esq.

  Edmondsbury, Saint, the new Public Library of

  Edwards, Mr.

  Egerton, the Hon. and Rev. Francis

  Escher, Mr.

  Eyre, Francis, Esq.

  Exeter, the Book Society of

                                F.

  Falconar, the Rev. Mr.

  Fearnside, Mr.

  Ferriday, William, Esq.

  Fitzhugh, Thomas, Esq.

  Forbes, James, Esq.

  Fox, James, Esq.

  Fraser, Mr.

  Fry, Nicholas, L. Esq.

                                G.

  Grafton, his Grace the Duke of

  Glasgow, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Grantham, the Rt. Hon. Lady

  Garthshore, Dr. 4 copies

  Garrow, William, Esq.

  Gebhardt, Mr.

  Gillett, Mr.

  Gisborne, the Rev. Thomas

  Gordon, Thomas, Esq.

  Gore, Colonel

  Greene, Thomas, Esq.

  Green, Mrs.

  Gregory, Robert, Esq.

  Gregory, the Rev. Edward

  Greville, Robert, Esq.

                                H.

  Howe, the Rt. Hon. Earl

  Howe, the Rt. Hon. Sir William

  Howe, the Hon. Caroline

  Howard, the Rt. Hon. Lady Julia

  Hawkins, Sir Christopher, Bart.

  Hort, Sir John, Bart.

  Hudson, Sir Charles Grave, Bart.

  Hale, Curteis, Esq.

  Haliburton, David, Esq.

  Halifax, the Library of

  Hall, J. G. Esq.

  Hammond, G. Esq.

  Hanbury, Sampson, Esq.

  Hardcastle, Joseph, Esq.

  Harris, Mr. Nathaniel

  Harvey, Mr.

  Hedgland, Mr. P.

  Heinemman, Mr. J. H.

  Hill, Mr. William

  Hislop, Mr.

  Hislop, Mrs.

  Hoare, Charles, Esq.

  Hoare, Henry Hugh, Esq.

  Hobhouse, Benjamin,. Esq. M.P.

  Hogarth, Mr. John

  Hoffman, Mr.

  Home, Miss

  Hooper, the Rev. W.B.D. and F.A.S.

  Horne, Edward,. Esq.

  Howarth, Mr.

  Hussey, Phineas, Esq.

                                I.

  James, Houghton, Esq.

  Jarrett, Herbert, Esq.

  Jennings, David, Esq.

  Jenyns, the Rev. George

  Imeson, Mr. William

  Ingram, Francis, Esq.

  Innis, John, Esq.

  Johnes, Thomas, Esq.

  Jones, Mrs.

  Jones, Miss

  Judge, Mr. John

  Ivatts, Mr. Thomas

                                K.

  Kerry, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  King, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Kemble, John Philip, Esq.

  Kendal, the Library at

  Knowles, Mr.

                                L.

  Landaff, the Bishop of

  Lucas, the Rt. Hon. Lady

  Leyser, Le Baron de

  Lee, Thomas, Esq.

  Leeds, the Library of

  Leeds, the new Subscription Library at

  Lindsey, the Rev. Theoph. A.M.

  Long, William, Esq.

  Long, Edward, Esq.

                                M.

  Montrose, his Grace the Duke of

  Moira, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Middleton, the Rt. Hon. Lord Viscount

  Middleton, Sir Charles, Bart.

  Macclesfield, Subscription Library at

  Maitland, Ebenezer, Esq.

  Maitland, John, Esq.

  Mappleton, Dr.

  Martin, the Rev. Mr.

  Mason, Major

  Mavor, John, Esq.

  Melville, General

  Michell, Charles, Esq.

  Miles, William, Esq.

  Millman, Dr.

  Miller, Charles, Esq.

  Mills, Dr.

  Monro, Captain George

  Mordaunt, General

  Morgan, William, Esq.

  Morland, Mr. Thomas

  Morris, Lieut. Col.

  Morris, Charles, Esq.

                                N.

  Northumberland, his Grace the Duke of

  Neave, Sir Richard, Bart. 2 copies

  Newbery, Francis, Esq.

  Newcastle upon Tyne, the Literary Society of

  Newcomen, William, Esq.

  Nicholls, John, Esq. M.P.

  Norris, H. H. Esq.

  North, Percival, Esq.

                                O.

  Oglander, Sir William, Bart.

  Ogle, Rev. Dr.

  Ogle, Nathaniel, Esq.

  Onslow, Arthur, Esq.

  Ormerod, the Rev. R.

                                P.

  Palmerston, the Rt. Hon. Lord Viscount

  Peachey, the Hon. John

  Pelham, the Hon. Mr.

  Penryhn, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Price, the Rt. Hon. Lady Maria

  Pulteney, Sir William, Bart.

  Parker, Samuel, Esq.

  Parker, Mrs.

  Palmer, Thomas, Esq.

  Paulett, Norton, Esq.

  Pearson, George, M.D.

  Pearson, the Rev. Mr.

  Peart, Dr.

  Peltier, Mons.

  Philips, the Rev. John

  Pickering, the Rev. Joseph

  Pryme, Mr.

                                R.

  Roxburghe, his Grace the Duke of

  Riddell, Sir John Buchanan, Bart.

  Rainsford, General

  Repton, Book Society of

  Reyner, Joseph, Esq.

  Rennell, Major

  Rennie, John, Esq.

  Reynolds, Richard, Esq.

  Rippon, Cuthbert, Esq.

  Roberts, the Rev. Thomas

  Robley, Joseph, Esq.

  Robley, John, Esq.

  Rochester, the Book Society of

  Rudge, Samuel, Esq.

  Russell, Claud, Esq.

                                S.

  Stopford, the Rt. Hon. Lord Viscount

  Suffield, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Sheffield, the Rt. Hon. Lord

  Stepney, Sir John, Bart.

  Staunton, Sir George, Bart.

  Stephens, Sir Philip, Bart. M.P. F.R.S. and S.A.

  Samuda, Mr. David, Jun.

  Sharp, William, Esq.

  Sharpe, the Rev. Mr.

  Shepherd, Tuffen, Esq.

  Simmons, Samuel Froart, M.D. F.R.S.

  Sittingbourn, the Library of

  Skipp, John, Esq.

  Skirrow, Mr.

  Sloane, Hans, Esq.

  Smith, Mr. James

  Smith, the Rev. John

  Smith, Thomas, Esq.

  Smith, William, Esq. M.P.

  Soane, John, Esq.

  Spann, John, Esq.

  Spooner, Isaac, Esq.

  Stainsforth, George, Esq.

  Stamford, the Library at

  Stanhope, Mr. Spencer

  Stanley, Colonel

  Stead, Mr. John

  Stephens, Francis, Esq.

  Stonard, the Rev. John

  Stonhewer, Richard, Esq.

  Stratford, the Rev. Wm. A.M.

  Stuart, And. Esq. M.P. 3 copies

  Sulivan, R. J. Esq.

  Symmons, John, Esq. 3 copies

  Symes, the Rev. James

                                T.

  Tate, the Rev. B.B.D.

  Taylor, the Rev. Dr.

  Thomas, Mr. L.

  Thompson, Mr.

  Thornton, Henry, Esq. M.P.

  Toulmin, T. Esq.

  Travers, Benjamin, Esq.

  Travers, Joseph, Esq.

  Trevelyan, Sir John, Bart.

  Trist, the Rev. Mr.

  Trowbridge and Warminster Book Society

  Tunnard, Mr.

  Turner, Charles, Esq.

  Turney, Mr. John

                                V.

  Upper Ossory, the Rt. Hon. the Earl of

  Vaughan, William, Esq.

                                W.

  Winchester, the Bishop of

  Walley, Josiah, Esq.

  Walker, J. Esq. F.R.S. and S.A.

  Walls, the Rev. Edward

  Warburton, John, Esq.

  Warmintser, the Book Society at

  Warwick, the Library of

  Watson, William, Esq.

  West, the Rev. Mr.

  Weston, the Rev. Stephen

  Whitaker, Mrs.

  White, James, Esq.

  Whitehead, Miss

  Whitfeld, the Rev. Henry, D.D.

  Wilberforce, William, Esq. M.P.

  Williams, Mr. Edward

  Windham, Joseph, Esq.

  Witke, Mr. 2 copies

  Wolff, George, Esq.

  Wolfers ton, Samuel Pipe, Esq.

  Woodhouse, Mr.

  Woodmason, James, Esq.

  Wright, Dr. William

                                Y.

  Yarmouth, the old Book Society at

  Yarmouth, the Monthly Book Society of

  Yerbury, John, Esq.

  Yonge, the Rev. D.

  Yorke, Lieut. Col.

  Young, Sir William, Bart. M.P.

                               * * * * *                                


                   DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THE PLATES.                   


  Portrait                                           to face the Title

  Route of Mr. Park                                           Chap. I.

  Rhamnus Lotus                                               page 100

  View of Ali’s Tent                                               122

  View of Kamalia                                                  252

  View of a Bridge                                                 338

  Shea, or the Butter Tree                                         352

                               APPENDIX.                                

  Map of North Africa                                         Chap. I.

  Chart of Variations                                       page xxvii




[Illustration: _The ROUTE of_ Mr. MUNGO PARK, _from_ Pisania _on
the River_ Gambia, _to_ Silla, _on the River_ Joliba, _or_ Niger;
_With his_ return _by the_ Southern Route, _to_ Pisania. Compiled
_from_ Mr. Park’s _Observations, Notes, & Sketches, By_ J. Rennell.

_Published according to Act of Parliament by James Rennell
5.April 1798._]


                                TRAVELS                                 
                                 IN THE                                 
                          INTERIOR OF AFRICA.                           
                               * * * * *                                

                               CHAPTER I.                               

_The Author’s Motives for undertaking the Voyage — his Instructions
and Departure — arrives at Jillifree, on the Gambia River —
proceeds to Vintain. — Some Account of the Feloops. — Proceeds
up the River for Jonkakonda — arrives at Dr. Laidley’s. —
Some Account of Pisania, and the British Factory established at that
Place. — The Author’s Employment during his Stay at Pisania —
his Sickness and Recovery — the Country described — prepares to
set out for the Interior._


Soon after my return from the East Indies in 1793, having learnt that
the Noblemen and Gentlemen, associated for the purpose of prosecuting
Discoveries in the Interior of Africa, were desirous of engaging a
person to explore that continent, by the way of the Gambia river, I
took occasion, through means of the President of the Royal Society,
to whom I had the honour to be known, of offering myself for that
service. I had been informed, that a gentleman of the name of Houghton,
a Captain in the army, and formerly Fort-Major at Goree, had already
sailed to the Gambia, under the direction of the Association, and that
there was reason to apprehend he had fallen a sacrifice to the climate,
or perished in some contest with the natives; but this intelligence,
instead of deterring me from my purpose, animated me to persist in the
offer of my services with the greater solicitude. I had a passionate
desire to examine into the productions of a country so little known;
and to become experimentally acquainted with the modes of life, and
character of the natives. I knew that I was able to bear fatigue;
and I relied on my youth, and the strength of my constitution, to
preserve me from the effects of the climate. The salary which the
Committee allowed was sufficiently large, and I made no stipulation
for future reward. If I should perish in my journey, I was willing
that my hopes and expectations should perish with me; and if I
should succeed in rendering the geography of Africa more familiar
to my countrymen, and in opening to their ambition and industry new
sources of wealth, and new channels of commerce, I knew that I was
in the hands of men of honour, who would not fail to bestow that
remuneration which my successful services should appear to them to
merit. The Committee of the Association, having made such inquiries
as they thought necessary, declared themselves satisfied with the
qualifications that I possessed, and accepted me for the service;
and with that liberality which on all occasions distinguishes their
conduct, gave me every encouragement which it was in their power to
grant, or which I could with propriety ask.

It was at first proposed that I should accompany Mr. James Willis,
who was then recently appointed Consul at Senegambia, and whose
countenance in that capacity it was thought might have served and
protected me; but Government afterwards rescinded his appointment,
and I lost that advantage. The kindness of the Committee, however,
supplied all that was necessary. Being favoured by the Secretary of
the Association, the late Henry Beaufoy, Esq. with a recommendation to
Dr. John Laidley (a gentleman who had resided many years at an English
factory on the banks of the Gambia), and furnished with a letter of
credit on him for £200, I took my passage in the brig Endeavour, a
small vessel trading to the Gambia for bees-wax and ivory, commanded
by Captain Richard Wyatt, and I became impatient for my departure.

My instructions were very plain and concise. I was directed, on
my arrival in Africa, “to pass on to the river Niger, either by
the way of Bambouk, or by such other route as should be found most
convenient. That I should ascertain the course, and, if possible,
the rise and termination of that river. That I should use my utmost
exertions to visit the principal towns or cities in its neighbourhood,
particularly Tombuctoo and Houssa; and that I should be afterwards at
liberty to return to Europe, either by the way of the Gambia, or by
such other route, as, under all the then existing circumstances of my
situation and prospects, should appear to me to be most advisable.”

We sailed from Portsmouth on the 22d day of May, 1795. On the 4th
of June, we saw the mountains over Mogadore, on the coast of Africa;
and on the 21st of the same month, after a pleasant voyage of thirty
days, we anchored at Jillifree, a town on the northern bank of the
river Gambia, opposite to James’s Island, where the English had
formerly a small fort.

The kingdom of Barra, in which the town of Jillifree is situated,
produces great plenty of the necessaries of life; but the chief trade
of the inhabitants is in salt; which commodity they carry up the river
in canoes as high as Barraconda, and bring down in return Indian corn,
cotton cloths, elephants’ teeth, small quantities of gold dust,
&c. The number of canoes and people constantly employed in this trade,
make the King of Barra more formidable to Europeans than any other
chieftain on the river; and this circumstance probably encouraged him
to establish those exorbitant duties, which traders of all nations are
obliged to pay at entry, amounting to nearly £20. on every vessel,
great and small. These duties, or customs, are generally collected in
person by the Alkaid, or Governor of Jillifree, and he is attended
on these occasions by a numerous train of dependants, among whom
are found many who, by their frequent intercourse with the English,
have acquired a smattering of our language; but they are commonly
very noisy, and very troublesome; begging for every thing they fancy
with such earnestness and importunity, that traders, in order to get
quit of them, are frequently obliged to grant their requests.

On the 23d we departed from Jillifree, and proceeded to Vintain,
a town situated about two miles up a creek on the southern side of
the river. This place is much resorted to by Europeans, on account of
the great quantities of bees-wax which are brought hither for sale:
the wax is collected in the woods by the Feloops, a wild and unsociable
race of people; their country, which is of considerable extent, abounds
in rice; and the natives supply the traders, both on the Gambia, and
Cassamansa rivers, with that article, and also with goats and poultry,
on very reasonable terms. The honey which they collect is chiefly
used by themselves in making a strong intoxicating liquor, much the
same as the mead which is produced from honey in Great Britain.

In their traffic with Europeans, the Feloops generally employ a factor,
or agent, of the Mandingo nation, who speaks a little English, and is
acquainted with the trade of the river. This broker makes the bargain;
and, with the connivance of the European, receives a certain part
only of the payment; which he gives to his employer as the whole;
the remainder (which is very truly called the _cheating money_)
he receives when the Feloop is gone, and appropriates to himself,
as a reward for his trouble.

The language of the Feloops is appropriate and peculiar; and as their
trade is chiefly conducted, as hath been observed, by Mandingoes, the
Europeans have no inducement to learn it. The numerals are as follow:

  One     ---   _Enory_.

  Two     ---   _Sickaba_, or _Cookaba_.

  Three   ---   _Sisajee_.

  Four    ---   _Sibakeer_.

  Five    ---   _Footuck_.

  Six     ---   _Footuck-Enory_.

  Seven   ---   _Footuck-Cookaba_.

  Eight   ---   _Footuck-Sisajee_.

  Nine    ---   _Footuck-Sibakeer_.

  Ten     ---   _Sibankonyen_.

On the 26th we left Vintain, and continued our course up the river,
anchoring whenever the tide failed us, and frequently towing the
vessel with the boat. The river is deep and muddy; the banks are
covered with impenetrable thickets of mangrove; and the whole of the
adjacent country appears to be flat and swampy.

The Gambia abounds with fish, some species of which are excellent
food; but none of them that I recollect are known in Europe. At
the entrance from the sea, sharks are found in great abundance;
and, higher up, alligators, and the hippopotamus (or river horse)
are very numerous. The latter might with more propriety be called
the river-elephant, being of an enormous and unwieldy bulk, and his
teeth furnish good ivory. This animal is amphibious, with short and
thick legs, and cloven hoofs; it feeds on grass, and such shrubs as
the banks of the river afford, boughs of trees, &c. seldom venturing
far from the water, in which it seeks refuge on hearing the approach
of man. I have seen many, and always found them of a timid and
inoffensive disposition.

In six days after leaving Vintain, we reached Jonkakonda, a place
of considerable trade, where our vessel was to take in part of her
lading. The next morning, the several European traders came from their
different factories to receive their letters, and learn the nature
and amount of the cargo; and the Captain, dispatched a messenger to
Dr. Laidley to inform him of my arrival. He came to Jonkakonda the
morning following, when I delivered him Mr. Beaufoy’s letter, and
he gave me a kind invitation to spend my time at his house until an
opportunity should offer of prosecuting my journey. This invitation
was too acceptable to be refused, and being furnished by the Doctor
with a horse and guide, I set out from Jonkakonda at daybreak on the
5th of July, and at eleven o’clock arrived at Pisania, where I was
accommodated with a room, and other conveniences in the Doctor’s
house.

Pisania is a small village in the King of Yany’s dominions,
established by British subjects as a factory for trade, and inhabited
solely by them and their black servants. It is situated on the banks
of the Gambia, sixteen miles above Jonkakonda. The white residents,
at the time of my arrival there, consisted only of Dr. Laidley,
and two gentlemen who were brothers, of the name of Ainsley; but
their domestics were numerous. They enjoyed perfect security under
the king’s protection, and being highly esteemed and respected by
the natives at large, wanted no accommodation or comfort which the
country could supply; and the greatest part of the trade in slaves,
ivory, and gold, was in their hands.

Being now settled for some time at my ease, my first object was to
learn the Mandingo tongue, being the language in almost general use
throughout this part of Africa; and without which I was fully convinced
that I never could acquire an extensive knowledge of the country or its
inhabitants. In this pursuit I was greatly assisted by Dr. Laidley,
who, by a long residence in the country, and constant intercourse
with the natives, had made himself completely master of it. Next to
the language, my great object was to collect information concerning
the countries I intended to visit. On this occasion I was referred
to certain traders called Slatees. These are free black merchants,
of great consideration in this part of Africa, who come down from
the interior countries, chiefly with enslaved Negroes for sale;
but I soon discovered that very little dependance could be placed on
the accounts which they gave; for they contradicted each other in the
most important particulars, and all of them seemed extremely unwilling
that I should prosecute my journey. These circumstances increased my
anxiety to ascertain the truth from my own personal observations.

In researches of this kind, and in observing the manners and customs
of the natives, in a country so little known to the nations of Europe,
and furnished with so many striking and uncommon objects of nature,
my time passed not unpleasantly; and I began to flatter myself that
I had escaped the fever, or seasoning, to which Europeans, on their
first arrival in hot climates, are generally subject. But, on the 31st
of July, I imprudently exposed myself to the night dew, in observing
an eclipse of the moon, with a view to determine the longitude of
the place: the next day I found myself attacked with a smart fever
and delirium; and such an illness followed, as confined me to the
house during the greatest part of August. My recovery was very slow:
but I embraced every short interval of convalescence to walk out, and
make myself acquainted with the productions of the country. In one of
those excursions, having rambled farther than usual, in a hot day,
I brought on a return of my fever, and on the 10th of September I
was again confined to my bed. The fever, however, was not so violent
as before; and in the course of three weeks I was able, when the
weather would permit, to renew my botanical excursions; and when it
rained, I amused myself with drawing plants, &c. in my chamber. The
care and attention of Dr. Laidley contributed greatly to alleviate
my sufferings; his company and conversation beguiled the tedious
hours during that gloomy season, when the rain falls in torrents;
when suffocating heats oppress by day, and when the night is spent
by the terrified traveller in listening to the croaking of frogs,
(of which the numbers are beyond imagination,) the shrill cry of
the jackall, and the deep howling of the hyæna; a dismal concert,
interrupted only by the roar of such tremendous thunder as no person
can form a conception of but those who have heard it.

The country itself being an immense level, and very generally covered
with woods, presents a tiresome and gloomy uniformity to the eye; but
although nature has denied to the inhabitants the beauties of romantic
landscapes, she has bestowed on them, with a liberal hand, the more
important blessings of fertility and abundance. A little attention
to cultivation procures a sufficiency of corn; the fields afford a
rich pasturage for cattle; and the natives are plentifully supplied
with excellent fish, both from the Gambia river and the Walli creek.

The grains which are chiefly cultivated are Indian corn, (_zea mays_);
two kinds of _holcus spicatus_, called by the natives _soono_ and
_sanio_; _holcus niger_, and _holcus bicolor_; the former of which
they have named _bassi woolima_, and the latter _bassiqui_. These,
together with rice, are raised in considerable quantities; besides
which, the inhabitants, in the vicinity of the towns and villages, have
gardens which produce onions, calavances, yams, cassavi, ground-nuts,
pompions, gourds, water melons, and some other esculent plants.

I observed likewise, near the towns, small patches of cotton and
indigo. The former of these articles supplies them with clothing,
and with the latter they dye their cloth of an excellent blue colour,
in a manner that will hereafter be described.

In preparing their corn for food, the natives use a large wooden mortar
called a _paloon_, in which they bruise the seed until it parts with
the outer covering, or husk, which is then separated from the clean
corn, by exposing it to the wind; nearly in the same manner as wheat is
cleared from the chaff in England. The corn thus freed from the husk,
is returned to the mortar, and beaten into meal; which is dressed
variously in different countries; but the most common preparation
of it among the nations of the Gambia, is a sort of pudding, which
they call _kouskous_. It is made by first moistening the flour with
water, and then stirring and shaking it about in a large calabash,
or gourd, till it adheres together in small granules, resembling
sago. It is then put into an earthen pot, whose bottom is perforated
with a number of small holes; and this pot being placed upon another,
the two vessels are luted together, either with a paste of meal and
water, or with cows’ dung, and placed upon the fire. In the lower
vessel is commonly some animal food and water, the steam or vapour
of which ascends through the perforations in the bottom of the upper
vessel, and softens and prepares the _kouskous_, which is very much
esteemed throughout all the countries that I visited. I am informed,
that the same manner of preparing flour, is very generally used on
the Barbary coast, and that the dish so prepared, is there called by
the same name. It is therefore probable, that the Negroes borrowed
the practice from the Moors.

For gratifying a taste for variety, another sort of pudding, called
_nealing_, is sometimes prepared from the meal of corn; and they have
also adopted two or three different modes of dressing their rice. Of
vegetable food, therefore, the natives have no want; and although the
common class of people are but sparingly supplied with animal food,
yet this article is not wholly withheld from them.

Their domestic animals are nearly the same as in Europe. Swine are
found in the woods, but their flesh is not esteemed: probably the
marked abhorrence in which this animal is held by the votaries of
Mahomet, has spread itself among the Pagans. Poultry of all kinds
(the turkey excepted) is every where to be had. The Guinea fowl and red
partridge, abound in the fields; and the woods furnish a small species
of antelope, of which the venison is highly and deservedly prized.

Of the other wild animals in the Mandingo countries, the most common
are the hyæna, the panther, and the elephant. Considering the use
that is made of the latter in the East Indies, it may be thought
extraordinary, that the natives of Africa have not, in any part of
this immense continent, acquired the skill of taming this powerful
and docile creature, and applying his strength and faculties to the
service of man. When I told some of the natives that this was actually
done in the countries of the East, my auditors laughed me to scorn,
and exclaimed, _Tobaubo fonnio!_ (a white man’s lie.) The Negroes
frequently find means to destroy the elephant by fire arms; they
hunt it principally for the sake of the teeth, which they transfer
in barter to those who sell them again to the Europeans. The flesh
they eat, and consider it as a great delicacy.

The usual beast of burthen in all the Negro territories, is the
ass. The application of animal labour to the purposes of agriculture,
is no where adopted; the plough, therefore, is wholly unknown. The
chief implement used in husbandry is the hoe, which varies in form in
different districts; and the labour is universally performed by slaves.

On the 6th of October the waters of the Gambia were at the greatest
height, being fifteen feet above the high-water mark of the tide;
after which they began to subside; at first slowly, but afterwards
very rapidly; sometimes sinking more than a foot in twenty-four hours:
by the beginning of November the river had sunk to its former level,
and the tide ebbed and flowed as usual. When the river had subsided,
and the atmosphere grew dry, I recovered apace, and began to think
of my departure; for this is reckoned the most proper season for
travelling: the natives had completed their harvest, and provisions
were every where cheap and plentiful.

Dr. Laidley was at this time employed in a trading voyage at
Jonkakonda. I wrote to him to desire that he would use his interest
with the slatees, or slave merchants, to procure me the company
and protection of the first _coffle_ (or caravan,) that might leave
Gambia for the interior country; and in the mean time I requested
him to purchase for me a horse, and two asses. A few days afterwards
the Doctor returned to Pisania, and informed me that a coffle would
certainly go for the interior, in the course of the dry season; but
that as many of the merchants belonging to it had not yet completed
their assortment of goods, he could not say at what time they would
set out.

As the characters and dispositions of the slatees, and people that
composed the caravan, were entirely unknown to me, and as they
seemed rather averse to my purpose, and unwilling to enter into any
positive engagements on my account; and the time of their departure
being withal very uncertain, I resolved, on further deliberation,
to avail myself of the dry season, and proceed without them.

Dr. Laidley approved my determination, and promised me every assistance
in his power, to enable me to prosecute my journey with comfort
and safety.

This resolution having been formed, I made preparations
accordingly. And now, being about to take leave of my hospitable
friend, (whose kindness and solicitude continued to the moment of my
departure,[2]) and to quit, for many months, the countries bordering
on the Gambia, it seems proper, before I proceed with my narrative,
that I should, in this place, give some account of the several Negro
nations which inhabit the banks of this celebrated river; and the
commercial intercourse that subsists between them, and such of the
nations of Europe as find their advantage in trading to this part
of Africa. The observations which have occurred to me on both these
subjects, will be found in the following Chapter.


[Footnote 2: Dr. Laidley, to my infinite regret, has since paid the
debt of nature. He left Africa in the latter end of 1797, intending
to return to Great Britain by way of the West Indies; and died soon
after his arrival at Barbadoes.]




                              CHAPTER II.                               

_Description of the Feloops, the Jaloffs, the Foulahs, and
Mandingoes. — Some Account of the Trade between the Nations of
Europe and the Natives of Africa by the way of the Gambia, and between
the native Inhabitants of the Coast and the Nations of the interior
Countries — their Mode of selling and buying,_ &c.


The natives of the countries bordering on the Gambia, though
distributed into a great many distinct governments, may, I think,
be divided into four great classes; the Feloops, the Jaloffs, the
Foulahs, and the Mandingoes. Among all these nations, the religion
of Mahomet has made, and continues to make, considerable progress;
but, in most of them, the body of the people, both free and enslaved,
persevere in maintaining the blind but harmless superstitions of their
ancestors, and are called by the Mahomedans _kafirs_, or infidels.

Of the Feloops, I have little to add to what has been observed
concerning them in the former Chapter. They are of a gloomy
disposition, and are supposed never to forgive an injury. They are even
said to transmit their quarrels as deadly feuds to their posterity;
insomuch that a son considers it as incumbent on him, from a just sense
of filial obligation, to become the avenger of his deceased father’s
wrongs. If a man loses his life in one of those sudden quarrels, which
perpetually occur at their feasts, when the whole party is intoxicated
with mead, his son, or the eldest of his sons (if he has more than
one), endeavours to procure his father’s sandals, which he wears
_once a year_, on the anniversary of his father’s death, until a
fit opportunity offers of revenging his fate, when the object of his
resentment seldom escapes his pursuit. This fierce and unrelenting
disposition is, however, counterbalanced by many good qualities: they
display the utmost gratitude and affection towards their benefactors;
and the fidelity with which they preserve whatever is intrusted to
them is remarkable. During the present war they have, more than once,
taken up arms to defend our merchant vessels from French privateers;
and English property, of considerable value, has frequently been left
at Vintain, for a long time, entirely under the care of the Feloops;
who have uniformly manifested on such occasions the strictest honesty
and punctuality. How greatly is it to be wished, that the minds of a
people so determined and faithful, could be softened and civilized,
by the mild and benevolent spirit of Christianity!

The Jaloffs (or Yaloffs) are an active, powerful, and warlike race,
inhabiting great part of that tract which lies between the river
Senegal, and the Mandingo States on the Gambia; yet they differ from
the Mandingoes, not only in language, but likewise in complexion and
features. The noses of the Jaloffs are not so much depressed, nor the
lips so protuberant, as among the generality of Africans; and although
their skin is of the deepest black, they are considered by the white
traders, as the most sightly Negroes in this part of the Continent.

They are divided into several independent states or kingdoms; which
are frequently at war either with their neighbours, or with each
other. In their manners, superstitions, and government, however,
they have a greater resemblance to the Mandingoes (of whom I shall
presently speak) than to any other nation; but excel them in the
manufacture of cotton cloth; spinning the wool to a finer thread,
weaving it in a broader loom, and dying it of a better colour.

Their language is said to be copious and significant; and is often
learnt by Europeans trading to Senegal. I cannot say much of it from
my own knowledge; but have preserved their numerals, which are these:

  One      ---   _Wean_.

  Two      ---   _Yar_.

  Three    ---   _Yat_.

  Four     ---   _Yanet_.

  Five     ---   _Judom_.

  Six      ---   _Judom wean_.

  Seven    ---   _Judom Yar_.

  Eight    ---   _Judom Yat_.

  Nine     ---   _Judom Yanet_.

  Ten      ---   _Fook_.

  Eleven   ---   _Fook aug wean_, &c

The Foulahs (or Pholeys), such of them at least as reside near the
Gambia, are chiefly of a tawny complexion, with soft silky hair, and
pleasing features. They are much attached to a pastoral life, and have
introduced themselves into all the kingdoms on the windward coast,
as herdsmen and husbandmen, paying a tribute to the sovereign of the
country for the lands which they hold. Not having many opportunities
however, during my residence at Pisania, of improving my acquaintance
with these people, I defer entering at large into their character,
until a fitter occasion occurs, which will present itself when I come
to Bondou.

The Mandingoes, of whom it remains to speak, constitute in truth,
the bulk of the inhabitants in all those districts of Africa
which I visited; and their language, with a few exceptions, is
universally understood, and very generally spoken, in that part of
the continent. Their numerals are these:[3]

  One      ---   _Killin_.

  Two      ---   _Foola_.

  Three    ---   _Sabba_.

  Four     ---   _Nani_.

  Five     ---   _Loolo_.

  Six      ---   _Woro_.

  Seven    ---   _Oronglo_.

  Eight    ---   _Sie_.

  Nine     ---   _Conunta_.

  Ten      ---   _Tang_.

  Eleven   ---   _Tan ning killin_, &c.

They are called Mandingoes, I conceive, as having originally
migrated from the interior state of Manding, of which some account
will hereafter be given; but, contrary to the present constitution
of their parent country, which is republican, it appeared to me
that the government in all the Mandingo states, near the Gambia,
is monarchical. The power of the sovereign is, however, by no means
unlimited. In all affairs of importance, the king calls an assembly
of the principal men, or elders, by whose councils he is directed, and
without whose advice he can neither declare war, nor conclude peace.

In every considerable town there is a chief magistrate, called the
_Alkaid_, whose office is hereditary, and whose business it is
to preserve order, to levy duties on travellers, and to preside
at all conferences in the exercise of local jurisdiction and the
administration of justice. These courts are composed of the elders
of the town (of free condition), and are termed _palavers_; and
their proceedings are conducted in the open air with sufficient
solemnity. Both sides of a question are freely canvassed, witnesses
are publicly examined, and the decisions which follow generally meet
with the approbation of the surrounding audience.

As the Negroes have no written language of their own, the general
rule of decision is an appeal to _ancient custom_; but since the
system of Mahomet has made so great progress among them, the converts
to that faith have gradually introduced, with the religious tenets,
many of the civil institutions of the Prophet; and where the Koran
is not found sufficiently explicit, recourse is had to a commentary
called _Al Sharra_, containing, as I was told, a complete exposition
or digest of the Mahomedan laws, both civil and criminal, properly
arranged and illustrated.

This frequency of appeal to written laws, with which the Pagan natives
are necessarily unacquainted, has given rise in their palavers to
(what I little expected to find in Africa) professional advocates,
or expounders of the law, who are allowed to appear and to plead for
plaintiff or defendant, much in the same manner as counsel in the law
courts of Great Britain. They are Mahomedan Negroes who have made,
or affect to have made, the laws of the Prophet their peculiar study;
and if I may judge from their harangues, which I frequently attended,
I believe that in the forensic qualifications of procrastination and
cavil, and the arts of confounding and perplexing a cause, they are
not always surpassed by the ablest pleaders in Europe. While I was at
Pisania a cause was heard which furnished the Mahomedan lawyers with an
admirable opportunity of displaying their professional dexterity. The
case was this: an ass belonging to a Serawoolli Negro (a native of
an interior country near the river Senegal) had broke into a field
of corn belonging to one of the Mandingo inhabitants, and destroyed
great part of it. The Mandingo having caught the animal in his field,
immediately drew his knife and cut its throat. The Serawoolli thereupon
called a _palaver_ (or in European terms, _brought an action_) to
recover damages for the loss of his beast, on which he set a high
value. The defendant confessed he had killed the ass, but pleaded a
_set off_, insisting that the loss he had sustained by the ravage in
his corn, was equal to the sum demanded for the animal. To ascertain
this fact was the point at issue, and the learned advocates contrived
to puzzle the cause in such a manner, that after a hearing of three
days, the court broke up without coming to any determination upon it;
and a second palaver was, I suppose, thought necessary.

The Mandingoes, generally speaking, are of a mild, sociable, and
obliging disposition. The men are commonly above the middle size,
well shaped, strong, and capable of enduring great labour; the women
are good-natured, sprightly and agreeable. The dress of both sexes
is composed of cotton cloth, of their own manufacture; that of the
men is a loose frock, not unlike a surplice, with drawers which
reach half way down the leg; and they wear sandals on their feet,
and white cotton caps on their heads. The women’s dress consists
of two pieces of cloth, each of which is about six feet long, and
three broad; one of these they wrap round the waist, which hanging
down to the ancles answers the purpose of a petticoat: the other is
thrown negligently over the bosom and shoulders.

This account of their clothing is indeed nearly applicable to the
natives of all the different countries in this part of Africa;
a peculiar national mode is observable only in the head dresses of
the women.

Thus, in the countries of the Gambia, the females wear a sort of
bandage, which they call _Jalla_. It is a narrow stripe of cotton
cloth, wrapped many times round, immediately over the forehead. In
Bondou the head is encircled with strings of white beads, and a small
plate of gold is worn in the middle of the forehead. In Kasson, the
ladies decorate their heads in a very tasteful and elegant manner,
with white sea-shells. In Kaarta and Ludamar, the women raise their
hair to a great height by the addition of a pad (as the ladies did
formerly in Great Britain) which they decorate with a species of
coral, brought from the Red sea by pilgrims returning from Mecca,
and sold at a great price.

In the construction of their dwelling houses the Mandingoes also
conform to the general practice of the African nations on this part
of the continent, contenting themselves with small and incommodious
hovels. A circular mud wall about four feet high, upon which is placed
a conical roof, composed of the bamboo cane, and thatched with grass,
forms alike the palace of the king, and the hovel of the slave. Their
household furniture is equally simple. A hurdle of canes placed upon
upright stakes, about two feet from the ground, upon which is spread
a mat or bullock’s hide, answers the purpose of a bed: a water jar,
some earthen pots for dressing their food, a few wooden bowls and
calabashes, and one or two low stools, compose the rest.

As every man of free condition has a plurality of wives, it is
found necessary (to prevent, I suppose, matrimonial disputes) that
each of the ladies should be accommodated with a hut to herself;
and all the huts belonging to the same family are surrounded by a
fence, constructed of bamboo canes, split and formed into a sort of
wicker-work. The whole inclosure is called a _sirk_, or _surk_. A
number of these inclosures, with narrow passages between them, form
what is called a town; but the huts are generally placed without any
regularity, according to the caprice of the owner. The only rule that
seems to be attended to, is placing the door towards the south-west,
in order to admit the sea breeze.

In each town is a large stage called the _bentang_, which answers the
purpose of a public hall or town-house; it is composed of interwoven
canes, and is generally sheltered from the sun by being erected in
the shade of some large tree. It is here that all public affairs are
transacted and trials conducted; and here the lazy and indolent meet
to smoke their pipes and hear the news of the day. In most of the towns
the Mahomedans have also a _missura_, or mosque, in which they assemble
and offer up their daily prayers, according to the rules of the Koran.

In the account which I have thus given of the natives, the reader must
bear in mind, that my observations apply chiefly to persons of _free
condition_, who constitute, I suppose, not more than one-fourth part
of the inhabitants at large; the other three-fourths are in a state
of hopeless and hereditary slavery; and are employed in cultivating
the land, in the care of cattle, and in servile offices of all kinds,
much in the same manner as the slaves in the West Indies. I was told,
however, that the Mandingo master can neither deprive his slave of
life, nor sell him to a stranger, without first calling a palaver on
his conduct; or, in other words, bringing him to a public trial: but
this degree of protection is extended only to the native or domestic
slave. Captives taken in war, and those unfortunate victims who are
condemned to slavery for crimes or insolvency, and, in short, all
those unhappy people who are brought down from the interior countries
for sale, have no security whatever, but may be treated and disposed
of in all respects as the owner thinks proper. It sometimes happens,
indeed, when no ships are on the Coast, that a humane and considerate
master, incorporates his purchased slaves among his domestics; and
their offspring at least, if not the parents, become entitled to all
the privileges of the native class.

The preceding remarks, concerning the several nations that inhabit
the banks of the Gambia, are all that I recollect as necessary to
be made in this place, at the outset of my journey. With regard to
the Mandingoes, however, many particulars are yet to be related;
some of which are necessarily interwoven into the narrative of my
progress, and others will be given in a summary, at the end of my
work; together with all such observations as I have collected on
the country and climate, which I could not with propriety insert
in the regular detail of occurrences. What remains of the present
Chapter will therefore relate solely to the trade which the nations of
Christendom have found means to establish with the natives of Africa,
by the channel of the Gambia; and the inland traffic which has arisen,
in consequence of it, between the inhabitants of the Coast, and the
nations of the interior countries.

The earliest European establishment on this celebrated river
was a factory of the Portugueze; and to this must be ascribed the
introduction of the numerous words of that language which are still
in use among the Negroes. The Dutch, French, and English, afterwards
successively possessed themselves of settlements on the Coast; but the
trade of the Gambia became, and continued for many years, a sort of
monopoly in the hands of the English. In the travels of Francis Moore,
is preserved an account of the Royal African Company’s establishments
in this river, in the year 1730; at which time James’s factory alone
consisted of a governor, deputy governor, and two other principal
officers; eight factors, thirteen writers, twenty inferior attendants
and tradesmen; a company of soldiers, and thirty-two Negro servants,
besides sloops, shallops, and boats, with their crews; and there were
no less than eight subordinate factories in other parts of the river.

The trade with Europe, by being afterwards laid open, was almost
annihilated; the share which the subjects of England at this time
hold in it, supports not more than two or three annual ships; and I am
informed that the gross value of British exports is under £20,000. The
French and Danes still maintain a small share, and the Americans have
lately sent a few vessels to the Gambia by way of experiment.

The commodities exported to the Gambia from Europe consist chiefly
of fire-arms and ammunition, iron ware, spirituous liquors, tobacco,
cotton caps, a small quantity of broad cloth, and a few articles of
the manufacture of Manchester; a small assortment of India goods,
with some glass beads, amber, and other trifles: for which are taken
in exchange slaves, gold-dust, ivory, bees-wax, and hides. Slaves
are the chief article, but the whole number which at this time are
annually exported from the Gambia by all nations, is supposed to be
under one thousand.

Most of these unfortunate victims are brought to the Coast in
periodical caravans; many of them from very remote inland countries;
for the language which they speak is not understood by the inhabitants
of the maritime districts. In a subsequent part of my work I shall
give the best information I have been able to collect concerning the
manner in which they are obtained. On their arrival at the Coast,
if no immediate opportunity offers of selling them to advantage, they
are distributed among the neighbouring villages, until a slave ship
arrives, or until they can be sold to black traders, who sometimes
purchase on speculation. In the meanwhile, the poor wretches are kept
constantly fettered, two and two of them being chained together,
and employed in the labours of the field: and I am sorry to add,
are very scantily fed, as well as harshly treated. The price of a
slave varies according to the number of purchasers from Europe, and
the arrival of caravans from the interior; but in general I reckon,
that a young and healthy male, from 16 to 25 years of age, may be
estimated on the spot from £18. to £20. sterling.

The Negro slave merchants, as I have observed in the former Chapter;
are called _Slatees_; who, besides slaves, and the merchandize
which they bring for sale to the whites, supply the inhabitants of
the maritime districts with native iron, sweet smelling gums and
frankincense, and a commodity called _Shea-toulou_, which, literally
translated, signifies _tree-butter_. This commodity is extracted,
by means of boiling water, from the kernel of a nut, as will be
more particularly described hereafter: it has the consistence and
appearance of butter; and is in truth an admirable substitute for
it. It forms an important article in the food of the natives, and
serves also for every domestic purpose in which oil would otherwise
be used. The demand for it is therefore very great.

In payment of these articles, the maritime states supply the interior
countries with salt, a scarce and valuable commodity, as I frequently
and painfully experienced in the course of my journey. Considerable
quantities of this article, however, are also supplied to the inland
natives by the Moors; who obtain it from the salt-pits in the Great
Desart, and receive in return corn, cotton cloth, and slaves.

In thus bartering one commodity for another, many inconveniences
must necessarily have arisen at first from the want of coined money,
or some other visible and determinate medium, to settle the balance,
or difference of value, between different articles; to remedy which,
the natives of the interior make use of small shells called _kowries_,
as will be shewn hereafter. On the Coast, the inhabitants have adopted
a practice which I believe is peculiar to themselves.

In their early intercourse with Europeans, the article that attracted
most notice was iron. Its utility, in forming the instruments of
war and husbandry, made it preferable to all others; and iron soon
became the measure by which the value of all other commodities was
ascertained. Thus a certain quantity of goods of whatever denomination,
appearing to be equal in value to a bar of iron, constituted, in
the traders phraseology, a bar of that particular merchandize. Twenty
leaves of tobacco, for instance, were considered as _a bar_ of tobacco;
and a gallon of spirits (or rather half spirits and half water),
as _a bar_ of rum; a bar of one commodity being reckoned equal in
value to a bar of another commodity.

As, however, it must unavoidably happen, that according to the
plenty or scarcity of goods at market in proportion to the demand,
the relative value would be subject to continual fluctuation,
greater precision has been found necessary; and at this time, the
current value of a single bar of any kind is fixed by the whites at
two shillings sterling. Thus a slave, whose price is £15. is said
to be worth 150 bars.

In transactions of this nature, it is obvious that the white trader
has infinitely the advantage over the African, whom, therefore,
it is difficult to satisfy; for, conscious of his own ignorance, he
naturally becomes exceedingly suspicious and wavering; and indeed
so very unsettled and jealous are the Negroes in their dealings
with the whites, that a bargain is never considered by the European
as concluded, until the purchase money is paid, and the party has
taken leave.

Having now brought together such general observations on the country,
and its inhabitants, as occurred to me during my residence in the
vicinage of the Gambia, I shall detain the reader no longer with
introductory matter, but proceed, in the next Chapter, to a regular
detail of the incidents which happened, and the reflections which
arose in my mind, in the course of my painful and perilous journey,
from its commencement, until my return to the Gambia.


[Footnote 3: In the Travels of Francis Moore the reader will find a
pretty copious vocabulary of the Mandingo language, which in general
is correct.]




                              CHAPTER III.                              

_The Author sets out from Pisania — his Attendants — reaches
Jindey. — Story related by a Mandingo Negro. — Proceeds to Medina,
the capital of Woolli. — Interview with the King. — Saphies or
Charms. — Proceeds to Kolor. — Description of Mumbo Jumbo —
arrives at Koojar — wrestling Match. — Crosses the Wilderness,
and arrives at Tallika, in the Kingdom of Bondou._


On the 2d of December, 1795, I took my departure from the hospitable
mansion of Dr. Laidley. I was fortunately provided with a Negro
servant, who spoke both the English and Mandingo tongues. His name
was _Johnson_. He was a native of this part of Africa; and having in
his youth been conveyed to Jamaica as a slave, he had been made free,
and taken to England by his master, where he had resided many years;
and at length found his way back to his native country. As he was
known to Dr. Laidley, the Doctor recommended him to me, and I hired
him as my interpreter, at the rate of ten bars monthly, to be paid
to himself, and five bars a month to be paid to his wife, during his
absence. Dr. Laidley furthermore provided me with a Negro boy of his
own, named _Demba_; a sprightly youth, who, besides Mandingo, spoke
the language of the Serawoollies, an inland people (of whom mention
will hereafter be made), residing on the banks of the Senegal; and
to induce him to behave well, the Doctor promised him his freedom on
his return, in case I should report favourably of his fidelity and
services. I was furnished with a horse for myself, (a small, but very
hardy and spirited beast, which cost me to the value of £7. 10_s._)
and two asses for my interpreter and servant. My baggage was light,
consisting chiefly of provisions for two days; a small assortment
of beads, amber, and tobacco, for the purchase of a fresh supply,
as I proceeded: a few changes of linen, and other necessary apparel,
an umbrella, a pocket sextant, a magnetic compass, and a thermometer;
together with two fowling pieces, two pair of pistols, and some other
small articles.

A free man (a Bushreen or Mahomedan), named Madiboo, who was travelling
to the kingdom of Bambara, and two Slatees, or slave merchants
of the Serawoolli nation, and of the same sect, who were going to
Bondou, offered their services as far as they intended respectively
to proceed; as did likewise a Negro named Tami, (also a Mahomedan,)
a native of Kasson, who had been employed some years by Dr. Laidley
as a blacksmith, and was returning to his native country with the
savings of his labours. All these men travelled on foot, driving
their asses before them.

Thus I had no less than six attendants, all of whom had been taught
to regard me with great respect; and to consider that their safe
return hereafter, to the countries on the Gambia, would depend on
my preservation.

Dr. Laidley himself, and Messrs. Ainsley, with a number of their
domestics, kindly determined to accompany me the two first days; and,
I believe, they secretly thought they should never see me afterwards.

We reached Jindey the same day, having crossed the Walli creek, a
branch of the Gambia, and rested at the house of a black woman, who
had formerly been the _chere amie_ of a white trader named Hewett;
and who, in consequence thereof, was called, by way of distinction,
_Seniora_. In the evening we walked out to see an adjoining village,
belonging to a Slatee named Jemaffoo Mamadoo, the richest of all the
Gambia traders. We found him at home; and he thought so highly of
the honour done him by this visit, that he presented us with a fine
bullock, which was immediately killed, and part of it dressed for
our evening’s repast.

The Negroes do not go to supper till late; and in order to amuse
ourselves while our beef was preparing, a Mandingo was desired to
relate some diverting stories; in listening to which, and smoking
tobacco, we spent three hours. These stories bear some resemblance
to those in the Arabian Nights Entertainments; but, in general, are
of a more ludicrous cast. I shall here abridge one of them for the
reader’s amusement.

“Many years ago (said the relator), the people of Doomasansa (a town
on the Gambia), were much annoyed by a lion, that came every night,
and took away some of their cattle. By continuing his depredations,
the people were at length so much enraged, that a party of them
resolved to go and hunt the monster. They accordingly proceeded in
search of the common enemy, who they found concealed in a thicket;
and immediately firing at him, were lucky enough to wound him in such
a manner, that, in springing from the thicket towards the people,
he fell down among the grass, and was unable to rise. The animal,
however, manifested such appearance of vigour, that nobody cared to
approach him singly; and a consultation was held, concerning the
properest means of taking him alive; a circumstance, it was said,
which, while it furnished undeniable proof of their prowess, would
turn out to great advantage, it being resolved to convey him to the
Coast, and sell him to the Europeans. While some persons proposed
one plan, and some another, an old man offered a scheme. This was,
to strip the roof of a house of its thatch, and to carry the bamboo
frame (the pieces of which are well secured together by thongs),
and throw it over the lion. If, in approaching him, he should attempt
to spring upon them, they had nothing to do but to let down the roof
upon themselves, and fire at the lion through the rafters.

“This proposition was approved and adopted. The thatch was taken
from the roof of a hut, and the lion-hunters, supporting the fabric,
marched courageously to the field of battle; each person carrying a
gun in one hand, and bearing his share of the roof on the opposite
shoulder. In this manner they approached the enemy: but the beast
had by this time recovered his strength; and such was the fierceness
of his countenance, that the hunters, instead of proceeding any
further, thought it prudent to provide for their own safety, by
covering themselves with the roof. Unfortunately, the lion was too
nimble for them; for, making a spring while the roof was setting
down, both the beast and his pursuers were caught in the same cage,
and the lion devoured them at his leisure, to the great astonishment
and mortification of the people of Doomasansa; at which place it is
dangerous even at this day to tell the story; for it is become the
subject of laughter and derision, in the neighbouring countries, and
nothing will enrage an inhabitant of that town so much as desiring
him to catch a lion alive.”

About one o’clock in the afternoon of the 3d of December, I took
my leave of Dr. Laidley and Messrs. Ainsley, and rode slowly into
the woods. I had now before me a boundless forest, and a country, the
inhabitants of which were strangers to civilized life, and to most of
whom a white man was the object of curiosity or plunder. I reflected
that I had parted from the last European I might probably behold, and
perhaps quitted for ever the comforts of Christian society. Thoughts
like these would necessarily cast a gloom over the mind, and I rode
musing along for about three miles, when I was awakened from my reverie
by a body of people, who came running up and stopped the asses, giving
me to understand that I must go with them to Peckaba, to present myself
to the King of Walli, or pay customs to them. I endeavoured to make
them comprehend that the object of my journey not being traffic,
I ought not to be subjected to a tax like the Slatees, and other
merchants, who travel for gain; but I reasoned to no purpose. They said
it was usual for travellers of all descriptions to make a present to
the King of Walli, and without doing so I could not be permitted to
proceed. As they were more numerous than my attendants, and withal
very noisy, I thought it prudent to comply with their demand, and
having presented them with four bars of tobacco, for the king’s
use, I was permitted to continue my journey, and at sunset reached
a village near Kootacunda, where we rested for the night.

In the morning of December 4th, I passed Kootacunda, the last town
of Walli, and stopped about an hour at a small adjoining village
to pay customs to an officer of the King of Woolli; we rested the
ensuing night at a village called Tabajang; and at noon the next
day (December 5th) we reached Medina, the capital of the King of
Woolli’s dominions.

The kingdom of Woolli is bounded by Walli on the west, by the Gambia
on the south, by the small river Walli on the north-west; by Bondou
on the north-east; and on the east, by the Simbani wilderness.

The country every where rises into gentle acclivities, which are
generally covered with extensive woods, and the towns are situated
in the intermediate valleys. Each town is surrounded by a tract of
cultivated land, the produce of which, I presume, is found sufficient
to supply the wants of the inhabitants; for the soil appeared to me to
be every where fertile, except near the tops of the ridges, where the
red iron stone and stunted shrubs sufficiently marked the boundaries
between fertility and barrenness. The chief productions are cotton,
tobacco, and esculent vegetables; all which are raised in the valleys,
the rising grounds being appropriated to different sorts of corn.

The inhabitants are Mandingoes; and, like most of the Mandingo nations,
are divided into two great sects, the Mahomedans, who are called
_Bushreens_, and the Pagans who are called indiscriminately _Kafirs_
(unbelievers) and _Sonakies_ (_i.e._ men who drink strong liquors.) The
Pagan natives are by far the most numerous, and the government of the
country is in their hands; for though the most respectable among the
Bushreens are frequently consulted in affairs of importance, yet they
are never permitted to take any share in the executive government,
which rests solely in the hands of the _Mansa_, or sovereign, and
great officers of the state. Of these, the first in point of rank
is the presumptive heir of the crown, who is called the _Farbanna_;
next to him are the _Alkaids_, or provincial governors, who are more
frequently called _Keamos_. Then follow the two grand divisions of
freemen and slaves[4]; of the former, the Slatees, so frequently
mentioned in the preceding pages, are considered as the principal:
but in all classes, great respect is paid to the authority of aged men.

On the death of the reigning monarch, his eldest son (if he has
attained the age of manhood) succeeds to the regal authority. If there
is no son, or if the son is under the age of discretion, a meeting
of the great men is held, and the late monarch’s nearest relation
(commonly his brother), is called to the government, not as regent,
or guardian to the infant son, but in full right, and to the exclusion
of the minor. The charges of the government are defrayed by occasional
tributes from the people, and by duties on goods transported across the
country. Travellers, on going from the Gambia towards the interior,
pay customs in European merchandize. On returning, they pay in iron
and _shea-toulou_: these taxes are paid at every town.

Medina[5] the capital of the kingdom, at which I was now arrived, is
a place of considerable extent; and may contain from eight hundred to
one thousand houses. It is fortified in the common African manner,
by a surrounding high wall built of clay, and an outward fence of
pointed stakes and prickly bushes; but the walls are neglected, and
the outward fence has suffered considerably from the active hands of
busy housewives, who pluck up the stakes for firewood. I obtained
a lodging at one of the king’s near relations, who apprized me,
that at my introduction to the king, I must not presume _to shake
hands with him_. It was not usual, he said, to allow this liberty to
strangers. Thus instructed, I went in the afternoon to pay my respects
to the sovereign; and ask permission to pass through his territories
to Bondou. The king’s name was _Jatta_. He was the same venerable
old man of whom so favourable an account was transmitted by Major
Houghton. I found him seated upon a mat before the door of his hut:
a number of men and women were arranged on each side, who were singing
and clapping their hands. I saluted him respectfully, and informed
him of the purport of my visit. The king graciously replied, that
he not only gave me leave to pass through his country, but would
offer up his prayers for my safety. On this, one of my attendants,
seemingly in return for the king’s condescension, began to sing,
or rather to roar, an Arabic song; at every pause of which, the king
himself, and all the people present, struck their hands against their
foreheads, and exclaimed, with devout and affecting solemnity, _Amen,
amen!_[6] The king told me furthermore, that I should have a guide
the day following, who would conduct me safely to the frontier of
his kingdom. I then took my leave, and in the evening sent the king
an order upon Dr. Laidley for three gallons of rum, and received in
return great store of provisions.

Dec. 6th, early in the morning, I went to the king a second time,
to learn if the guide was ready. I found his majesty sitting upon
a bullock’s hide, warming himself before a large fire; for the
Africans are sensible of the smallest variation in the temperature of
the air, and frequently complain of cold when a European is oppressed
with heat. He received me with a benevolent countenance, and tenderly
entreated me to desist from my purpose of travelling into the interior;
telling me, that Major Houghton had been killed in his route, and that
if I followed his footsteps, I should probably meet with his fate. He
said that I must not judge of the people of the eastern country by
those of Woolli: that the latter were acquainted with white men,
and respected them, whereas the people of the east had never seen a
white man, and would certainly destroy me. I thanked the king for his
affectionate solicitude, but told him that I had considered the matter,
and was determined, notwithstanding all dangers, to proceed. The
king shook his head, but desisted from further persuasion; and told
me the guide should be ready in the afternoon.

About two o’clock, the guide appearing, I went and took my last
farewell of the good old king, and in three hours reached Konjour,
a small village, where we determined to rest for the night. Here I
purchased a fine sheep for some beads, and my Serawoolli attendants
killed it with all the ceremonies prescribed by their religion: part
of it was dressed for supper; after which a dispute arose between
one of the Serawoolli Negroes and Johnson, my interpreter, about
the sheep’s horns. The former claimed the horns as his perquisite,
for having acted the part of our butcher, and Johnson contested the
claim. I settled the matter by giving a horn to each of them. This
trifling incident is mentioned as introductory to what follows: for
it appeared on inquiry that these horns were highly valued, as being
easily convertible into portable sheaths, or cases, for containing
and keeping secure certain charms or amulets called _saphies_, which
the Negroes constantly wear about them. These saphies are prayers,
or rather sentences, from the Koran, which the Mahomedan priests write
on scraps of paper, and sell to the simple natives, who consider them
to possess very extraordinary virtues. Some of the Negroes wear them
to guard themselves against the bite of snakes or alligators; and
on this occasion the saphie is commonly inclosed in a snake’s or
alligator’s skin, and tied round the ancle. Others have recourse
to them in time of war, to protect their persons against hostile
weapons; but the common use to which these amulets are applied, is to
prevent or cure bodily diseases; to preserve from hunger and thirst,
and generally to conciliate the favour of superior powers under all
the circumstances and occurrences of life.[7]

In this case, it is impossible not to admire the wonderful contagion
of superstition; for, notwithstanding that the majority of the
Negroes are Pagans, and absolutely reject the doctrines of Mahomet,
I did not meet with a man, whether a Bushreen or Kafir, who was not
fully persuaded of the powerful efficacy of these amulets. The truth
is, that all the natives of this part of Africa consider the art of
writing as bordering on magic; and it is not in the doctrines of the
Prophet, but in the arts of the magician, that their confidence is
placed. It will hereafter be seen that I was myself lucky enough,
in circumstances of distress, to turn the popular credulity in this
respect to good account.

On the 7th I departed from Konjour, and slept at a village called
Malla (or Mallaing); and on the 8th about noon I arrived at Kolor,
a considerable town; near the entrance into which I observed,
hanging upon a tree, a sort of masquerade habit, made of the bark
of trees, which I was told on inquiry belonged to MUMBO JUMBO. This
is a strange bugbear, common to all the Mandingo towns, and much
employed by the Pagan natives in keeping their women in subjection;
for as the Kafirs are not restricted in the number of their wives,
every one marries as many as he can conveniently maintain; and as it
frequently happens that the ladies disagree among themselves, family
quarrels sometime rise to such a height, that the authority of the
husband can no longer preserve peace in his household. In such cases,
the interposition of Mumbo Jumbo is called in, and is always decisive.

This strange minister of justice (who is supposed to be either the
husband himself, or some person instructed by him), disguised in
the dress that has been mentioned, and armed with the rod of public
authority, announces his coming (whenever his services are required)
by loud and dismal screams in the woods near the town. He begins
the pantomime at the approach of night; and as soon as it is dark,
he enters the town, and proceeds to the Bentang, at which all the
inhabitants immediately assemble.

It may easily be supposed that this exhibition is not much relished
by the women; for as the person in disguise is entirely unknown to
them, every married female suspects that the visit may possibly be
intended for herself; but they dare not refuse to appear when they
are summoned; and the ceremony commences with songs and dances,
which continue till midnight, about which time Mumbo fixes on the
offender. This unfortunate victim being thereupon immediately seized,
is stripped naked, tied to a post, and severely scourged with Mumbo’s
rod, amidst the shouts and derision of the whole assembly; and it
is remarkable, that the rest of the women are the loudest in their
exclamations on this occasion against their unhappy sister. Daylight
puts an end to this indecent and unmanly revel.

December 9th. As there was no water to be procured on the road,
we travelled with great expedition until we reached Tambacunda, and
departing from thence early the next morning, the 10th; we reached
in the evening Kooniakary, a town of nearly the same magnitude as
Kolor. About noon on the 11th we arrived at Koojar, the frontier
town of Woolli, towards Bondou, from which it is separated by an
intervening Wilderness of two days’ journey.

The guide appointed by the King of Woolli being now to return,
I presented him with some amber for his trouble: and having been
informed that it was not possible at all times to procure water in
the Wilderness, I made inquiry for men who would serve both as guides
and water-bearers during my journey across it. Three Negroes, elephant
hunters, offered their services for these purposes, which I accepted,
and paid them 3 bars each in advance, and the day being far spent,
I determined to pass the night in my present quarters.

The inhabitants of Koojar, though not wholly unaccustomed to the sight
of Europeans (most of them having occasionally visited the countries
on the Gambia) beheld me with a mixture of curiosity and reverence,
and in the evening invited me to see a _neobering_, or wrestling match,
at the Bentang. This is an exhibition very common in all the Mandingo
countries. The spectators arranged themselves in a circle, leaving
the intermediate space for the wrestlers, who were strong active
young men, full of emulation, and accustomed I suppose from their
infancy to this sort of exertion. Being stripped of their clothing,
except a short pair of drawers, and having their skin anointed with
oil, or _shea_ butter, the combatants approached each other on all
fours, parrying with, and occasionally extending a hand for some time,
till at length one of them sprang forward, and caught his rival by the
knee. Great dexterity and judgment were now displayed; but the contest
was decided by superior strength; and I think that few Europeans would
have been able to cope with the conqueror. It must not be unobserved,
that the combatants were animated by the music of a drum, by which
their actions were in some measure regulated.

The wrestling was succeeded by a dance, in which many performers
assisted, all of whom were provided with little bells, which were
fastened to their legs and arms; and here too the drum regulated their
motions. It was beaten with a crooked stick, which the drummer held in
his right hand, occasionally using his left to deaden the sound, and
thus vary the music. The drum is likewise applied on these occasions
to keep order among the spectators, by imitating the sound of certain
Mandingo sentences: for example, when the wrestling match is about
to begin, the drummer strikes what is understood to signify _ali
bæ si_,—sit all down; upon which the spectators immediately seat
themselves; and when the combatants are to begin, he strikes _amuta
amuta_,—take hold, take hold.

In the course of the evening I was presented, by way of refreshment,
with a liquor which tasted so much like the strong-beer of my native
country (and very good beer too), as to induce me to inquire into its
composition; and I learnt, with some degree of surprise, that it was
actually made from corn which had been previously malted, much in the
same manner as barley is malted in Great Britain: a root yielding a
grateful bitter, was used in lieu of hops, the name of which I have
forgot; but the corn which yields the wort, is the _holcus spicatus_
of botanists.

Early in the morning (the 12th) I found that one of the elephant
hunters had absconded with the money he had received from me in part
of wages; and in order to prevent the other two from following his
example, I made them instantly fill their calabashes (or gourds) with
water, and as the sun rose I entered the Wilderness that separates
the kingdoms of Woolli and Bondou.

We had not travelled more than a mile before my attendants insisted
on stopping, that they might prepare a saphie, or charm, to insure
us a safe journey. This was done by muttering a few sentences, and
spitting upon a stone, which was thrown before us on the road. The same
ceremony was repeated three times, after which the Negroes proceeded
with the greatest confidence; every one being firmly persuaded that
the stone (like the scape goat) had carried with it every thing that
could induce superior powers to visit us with misfortune.

We continued our journey without stopping any more until noon, when
we came to a large tree, called by the natives _Neema Taba_. It had
a very singular appearance, being decorated with innumerable rags
or scraps of cloth, which persons travelling across the Wilderness
had, at different times, tied to the branches; probably, at first,
to inform the traveller that water was to be found near it; but
the custom has been so greatly sanctioned by time, that nobody now
presumes to pass without hanging up something. I followed the example,
and suspended a handsome piece of cloth on one of the boughs, and being
told that either a well, or pool of water, was at no great distance,
I ordered the Negroes to unload the asses, that we might give them
corn, and regale ourselves with the provisions we had brought. In
the mean time, I sent one of the elephant hunters to look for the
well, intending, if water was to be obtained, to rest here for the
night. A pool was found, but the water was thick and muddy, and the
Negro discovered near it the remains of a fire recently extinguished,
and the fragments of provisions, which afforded a proof that it had
been lately visited, either by travellers or banditti. The fears of
my attendants supposed the latter; and believing that robbers lurked
near us, I was persuaded to change my resolution of resting here all
night, and proceed to another watering place, which I was assured we
might reach early in the evening.

We departed accordingly, but it was eight o’clock at night before we
came to the watering place; and being now sufficiently fatigued with
so long a day’s journey, we kindled a large fire, and lay down,
surrounded by our cattle, on the bare ground, more than a gun-shot
from any bush; the Negroes agreeing to keep watch by turns to prevent
surprise.

I knew not indeed that any danger was justly to be dreaded, but
the Negroes were unaccountably apprehensive of banditti, during
the whole of the journey. As soon therefore as daylight appeared,
we filled our _soofros_ (skins) and calabashes at the pool, and set
out for Tallika, the first town in Bondou, which we reached about
eleven o’clock in the forenoon (the 13th of December). I cannot,
however, take leave of Woolli, without observing that I was every
where well received by the natives; and that the fatigues of the day
were generally alleviated by a hearty welcome at night; and although
the African mode of living was at first unpleasant to me, yet I found,
at length, that custom surmounted trifling inconveniences, and made
every thing palatable and easy.


[Footnote 4: The term which signifies a man of free condition is
_Horea_, that of a slave, _Jong_.]

[Footnote 5: Medina in the Arabic signifies a city; the name is
not uncommon among the Negroes, and has probably been borrowed from
the Mahomedans.]

[Footnote 6: It may seem from hence that the king was a Mahomedan; but
I was assured to the contrary. He joined in prayer on this occasion
probably from the mere dictates of his benevolent mind; considering
perhaps that prayers to the Almighty, offered up with true devotion and
sincerity, were equally acceptable, whether from Bushreen or Pagan.]

[Footnote 7: I believe that similar charms or amulets, under the
names of _domini_, _grigri_, _fetich_, &c. &c. are common in all
parts of Africa.]




                              CHAPTER IV.                               

_Some Account of the Inhabitants of Tallika. — The Author proceeds
for Fatteconda — Incidents on the Road. — Crosses the Neriko,
arrives at Koorkarany — reaches the River Falemé — Fishery on that
River — proceeds along its Bank to Naye or Nayemow — crosses the
Falemé and arrives at Fatteconda. — Has an Interview with Almami,
the Sovereign of Bondou. — Description of the King’s Dwelling
— has a second Interview with the King, who begs the Author’s
Coat. — Author visits the King’s Wives — is permitted to depart
on friendly Terms. — Journey by Night — arrives at Joag. — Some
Account of Bondou and its Inhabitants the Foulahs._


Tallika, the frontier town of Bondou towards Woolli, is inhabited
chiefly by Foulahs of the Mahomedan religion, who live in considerable
affluence, partly by furnishing provisions to the _coffles_, or
caravans, that pass through the town, and partly by the sale of ivory,
obtained by hunting elephants; in which employment the young men are
generally very successful. Here, an officer belonging to the King
of Bondou constantly resides, whose business it is to give timely
information of the arrival of the caravans; which are taxed according
to the number of loaded asses that arrive at Tallika.

I took up my residence at this officer’s house, and agreed with him
to accompany me to Fatteconda, the residence of the king; for which
he was to receive five bars; and before my departure I wrote a few
lines to Dr. Laidley, and gave my letter to the master of a caravan
bound for the Gambia. This caravan consisted of five asses loaded with
ivory. The large teeth are conveyed in nets, two on each side of the
ass; the small ones are wrapped up in skins, and secured with ropes.

December 14th. We left Tallika, and rode on very peaceably for
about two miles, when a violent quarrel arose between two of my
fellow-travellers, one of whom was the blacksmith, in the course of
which they bestowed some opprobrious terms upon each other; and it is
worthy of remark, that an African will sooner forgive a blow, than a
term of reproach applied to his ancestors: “Strike me, but do not
curse my mother,” is a common expression even among the slaves. This
sort of abuse, therefore, so enraged one of the disputants that he drew
his cutlass upon the blacksmith, and would certainly have ended the
dispute in a very serious manner, if the others had not laid hold of
him; and wrested the cutlass from him. I was obliged to interfere, and
put an end to this disagreeable business, by desiring the blacksmith
to be silent, and telling the other, who I thought was in the wrong,
that if he attempted in future to draw his cutlass, or molest any
of my attendants, I should look upon him as a robber, and shoot
him without further ceremony. This threat had the desired effect,
and we marched sullenly along till the afternoon, when we arrived
at a number of small villages scattered over an open and fertile
plain; at one of these called Ganado we took up our residence for
the night: here an exchange of presents and a good supper terminated
all animosities among my attendants; and the night was far advanced
before any of us thought of going to sleep. We were amused by an
itinerant _singing man_,[8] who told a number of diverting stories,
and played some sweet airs, by blowing his breath upon a bowstring,
and striking it at the same time with a stick.

December 15th. At daybreak my fellow-travellers, the Serawoollies, took
leave of me, with many prayers for my safety. About a mile from Ganado,
we crossed a considerable branch of the Gambia, called Neriko. The
banks were steep, and covered with _mimosas_; and I observed in the
mud a number of large muscles, but the natives do not eat them. About
noon, the sun being exceedingly hot, we rested two hours in the shade
of a tree, and purchased some milk and pounded corn from some Foulah
herdsmen, and at sunset reached a town called Koorkarany, where the
blacksmith had some relations; and here we rested two days.

Koorkarany is a Mahomedan town, surrounded by a high wall, and
is provided with a mosque. Here I was shewn a number of Arabic
manuscripts, particularly a copy of the book before mentioned called
_Al Shara_. The _Maraboo_, or priest, in whose possession it was,
read and explained to me in Mandingo, many of the most remarkable
passages; and in return I shewed him Richardson’s Arabic grammar,
which he very much admired.

On the evening of the second day (Dec. 17th) we departed from
Koorkarany. We were joined by a young man who was travelling to
Fatteconda for salt; and as night set in we reached Dooggi, a small
village about three miles from Koorkarany.

Provisions were here so cheap that I purchased a bullock for six
small stones of amber; for I found my company increase or diminish
according to the good fare they met with.

Dec. 18th. Early in the morning we departed from Dooggi, and being
joined by a number of Foulahs and other people, made a formidable
appearance; and were under no apprehension of being plundered in the
woods. About eleven o’clock one of the asses proving very refractory,
the Negroes took a curious method to make him tractable. They cut
a forked stick, and putting the forked part into the ass’s mouth,
like the bit of a bridle, tied the two smaller parts together above
his head, leaving the lower part of the stick of sufficient length to
strike against the ground, if the ass should attempt to put his head
down. After this, the ass walked along quietly, and gravely enough,
taking care, after some practice, to hold his head sufficiently high
to prevent the stones or roots of trees from striking against the
end of the stick, which experience had taught him would give a severe
shock to his teeth. This contrivance produced a ludicrous appearance,
but my fellow-travellers told me it was constantly adopted by the
Slatees, and always proved effectual.

In the evening we arrived at a few scattered villages, surrounded with
extensive cultivation; at one of which, called Buggil, we passed the
night in a miserable hut, having no other bed than a bundle of corn
stalks, and no provisions but what we brought with us. The wells here
are dug with great ingenuity, and are very deep. I measured one of
the bucket ropes, and found the depth of the well to be 28 fathoms.

Dec. 19th. We departed from Buggil, and travelled along a dry, stony
height, covered with _mimosas_, till mid-day; when the land sloped
towards the east, and we descended into a deep valley, in which I
observed abundance of whin-stone, and white quartz. Pursuing our course
to the eastward, along this valley, in the bed of an exhausted river
course, we came to a large village, where we intended to lodge. We
found many of the natives, dressed in a thin French gauze, which they
called _Byqui_; this being a light airy dress, and well calculated to
display the shape of their persons, is much esteemed by the ladies. The
manners of these females, however, did not correspond with their
dress; for they were rude and troublesome in the highest degree; they
surrounded me in numbers, begging for amber, beads, &c.; and were so
vehement in their solicitations, that I found it impossible to resist
them. They tore my cloak, cut the buttons from my boy’s clothes,
and were proceeding to other outrages, when I mounted my horse and
rode off, followed for half a mile by a body of these harpies.

In the evening we reached Soobrudooka, and as my company was numerous,
(being fourteen) I purchased a sheep, and abundance of corn for supper;
after which we lay down by the bundles, and passed an uncomfortable
night in a heavy dew.

Dec. 20th. We departed from Soobrudooka, and at two o’clock reached
a large village situated on the banks of the Falemé river, which is
here rapid and rocky. The natives were employed in fishing in various
ways. The large fish were taken in long baskets made of split cane,
and placed in a strong current, which was created by walls of stone
built across the stream, certain open places being left, through which
the water rushed with great force. Some of these baskets were more
than 20 feet long, and when once the fish had entered one of them,
the force of the stream prevented it from returning. The small fish
were taken in great numbers in hand-nets, which the natives weave of
cotton, and use with great dexterity. The fish last mentioned are
about the size of sprats, and are prepared for sale in different
ways; the most common is by pounding them entire as they come from
the stream, in a wooden mortar, and exposing them to dry in the sun,
in large lumps, like sugar loaves. It may be supposed that the smell
is not very agreeable; but in the Moorish countries to the north
of the Senegal, where fish is scarcely known, this preparation is
esteemed as a luxury, and sold to considerable advantage. The manner
of using it by the natives is, by dissolving a piece of this black
loaf in boiling water, and mixing it with their _kouskous_.

I thought it very singular, at this season of the year, to find the
banks of the Falemé every where covered with large and beautiful
fields of corn; but on examination I found it was not the same species
of grain as is commonly cultivated on the Gambia; it is called by
the natives _Manio_; and grows in the dry season, is very prolific,
and is reaped in the month of January. It is the same which, from
the depending position of the ear, is called by botanical writers
_holcus cernuus_.

On returning to the village, after an excursion to the river side,
to inspect the fishery, an old Moorish shereeff came to bestow his
blessing upon me, and beg some paper to write saphies upon. This
man had seen Major Houghton in the kingdom of Kaarta, and told me
that he died in the country of the Moors. I gave him a few sheets of
paper, and he levied a similar tribute from the blacksmith; for it
is customary for young Mussulmen to make presents to the old ones,
in order to obtain their blessing, which is pronounced in Arabic,
and received with great humility.

About three in the afternoon we continued our course along the bank
of the river, to the northward, till eight o’clock, when we reached
Nayemow; here the hospitable master of the town received us kindly,
and presented us with a bullock. In return, I gave him some amber
and beads.

Dec. 21st. In the morning, having agreed for a canoe to carry over
my bundles, I crossed the river, which came up to my knees, as I
sat on my horse; but the water is so clear, that from the high bank,
the bottom is visible all the way over.

About noon we entered Fatteconda, the capital of Bondou; and in a
little time received an invitation to the house of a respectable
Slatee: for as there are no public houses in Africa, it is customary
for strangers to stand at the Bentang, or some other place of
public resort, till they are invited to a lodging by some of the
inhabitants. We accepted the offer; and in an hour afterwards, a
person came and told me that he was sent on purpose to conduct me to
the king, who was very desirous of seeing me immediately, if I was
not too much fatigued.

I took my interpreter with me, and followed the messenger till
we got quite out of the town, and crossed some corn fields; when
suspecting some trick I stopped, and asked the guide whither he was
going. Upon which he pointed to a man sitting under a tree at some
little distance; and told me that the king frequently gave audience
in that retired manner, in order to avoid a crowd of people; and
that nobody but myself and my interpreter must approach him. When I
advanced, the king desired me to come and sit by him upon the mat;
and after hearing my story, on which he made no observation, he asked
if I wished to purchase any slaves, or gold: being answered in the
negative, he seemed rather surprised; but desired me to come to him
in the evening, and he would give me some provisions.

This monarch was called Almami; a Moorish name, though I was told that
he was not a Mahomedan, but a Kafir, or Pagan. I had heard that he
had acted towards Major Houghton with great unkindness, and caused
him to be plundered. His behaviour, therefore, towards myself at
this interview, though much more civil than I expected, was far from
freeing me from uneasiness. I still apprehended some double dealing;
and as I was now entirely in his power, I thought it best to smooth
the way by a present; accordingly I took with me in the evening,
one cannister of gunpowder, some amber, tobacco, and my umbrella;
and as I considered that my bundles would inevitably be searched,
I concealed some few articles in the roof of the hut where I lodged,
and I put on my new blue coat, in order to preserve it.

All the houses belonging to the king and his family are surrounded by
a lofty mud wall, which converts the whole into a kind of citadel. The
interior is subdivided into different courts. At the first place of
entrance I observed a man standing with a musket on his shoulder;
and I found the way to the presence very intricate, leading through
many passages, with centinels placed at the different doors. When we
came to the entrance of the court in which the king resides, both my
guide and interpreter, according to custom, took off their sandals;
and the former pronounced the king’s name aloud, repeating it till
he was answered from within. We found the monarch sitting upon a mat,
and two attendants with him. I repeated what I had before told him
concerning the object of my journey, and my reasons for passing
through his country. He seemed, however, but half satisfied. The
notion of travelling for curiosity, was quite new to him. He thought
it impossible, he said, that any man in his senses would undertake
so dangerous a journey, merely to look at the country, and its
inhabitants: however, when I offered to shew him the contents of
my portmanteau, and every thing belonging to me, he was convinced;
and it was evident that his suspicion had arisen from a belief, that
every white man must of necessity be a trader. When I had delivered my
presents, he seemed well pleased, and was particularly delighted with
the umbrella, which he repeatedly furled and unfurled, to the great
admiration of himself and his two attendants; who could not for some
time comprehend the use of this wonderful machine. After this I was
about to take my leave, when the king, desiring me to stop a while,
began a long preamble in favour of the whites; extolling their immense
wealth, and good dispositions. He next proceeded to an eulogium on my
blue coat, of which the yellow buttons seemed particularly to catch
his fancy; and he concluded by entreating me to present him with it;
assuring me, for my consolation under the loss of it, that he would
wear it on all public occasions, and inform every one who saw it, of
my great liberality towards him. The request of an African prince, in
his own dominions, particularly when made to a stranger, comes little
short of a command. It is only a way of obtaining by gentle means,
what he can, if he pleases, take by force; and as it was against my
interest to offend him by a refusal, I very quietly took off my coat,
the only good one in my possession, and laid it at his feet.

In return for my compliance, he presented me with great plenty of
provisions, and desired to see me again in the morning. I accordingly
attended, and found him sitting upon his bed. He told me he was sick,
and wished to have a little blood taken from him; but I had no sooner
tied up his arm, and displayed the lancet, than his courage failed; and
he begged me to postpone the operation till the afternoon, as he felt
himself, he said, much better than he had been, and thanked me kindly
for my readiness to serve him. He then observed, that his women were
very desirous to see me, and requested that I would favour them with
a visit. An attendant was ordered to conduct me; and I had no sooner
entered the court appropriated to the ladies, than the whole seraglio
surrounded me; some begging for physic, some for amber; and all of them
desirous of trying that great African specific, _blood-letting_. They
were 10 or 12 in number, most of them young and handsome, and wearing
on their heads ornaments of gold, and beads of amber.

They rallied me with a good deal of gaiety on different subjects;
particularly upon the whiteness of my skin, and the prominency of
my nose. They insisted that both were artificial. The first, they
said, was produced when I was an infant, by dipping me in milk; and
they insisted that my nose had been pinched every day, till it had
acquired its present unsightly and unnatural conformation. On my part,
without disputing my own deformity, I paid them many compliments on
African beauty. I praised the glossy jet of their skins, and the
lovely depression of their noses; but they said that flattery, or
(as they emphatically termed it) _honey-mouth_, was not esteemed in
Bondou. In return, however, for my company or my compliments (to which,
by the way, they seemed not so insensible as they affected to be),
they presented me with a jar of honey and some fish, which were sent
to my lodging; and I was desired to come again to the king a little
before sunset.

I carried with me some beads and writing paper, it being usual to
present some small offering on taking leave: in return for which,
the king gave me five drachms of gold; observing, that it was but a
trifle, and given out of pure friendship; but would be of use to me
in travelling, for the purchase of provisions. He seconded this act
of kindness by one still greater; politely telling me, that though
it was customary to examine the baggage of every traveller passing
through his country, yet, in the present instance, he would dispense
with that ceremony; adding, I was at liberty to depart when I pleased.

Accordingly, on the morning of the 23d, we left Fatteconda, and about
eleven o’clock came to a small village, where we determined to stop
for the rest of the day.

In the afternoon my fellow-travellers informed me, that as this was
the boundary between Bondou and Kajaaga, and dangerous for travellers,
it would be necessary to continue our journey by night, until we should
reach a more hospitable part of the country. I agreed to the proposal,
and hired two people for guides through the woods; and as soon as the
people of the village were gone to sleep (the moon shining bright) we
set out. The stillness of the air, the howling of the wild beasts,
and the deep solitude of the forest, made the scene solemn and
impressive. Not a word was uttered by any of us, but in a whisper;
all were attentive, and every one anxious to shew his sagacity,
by pointing out to me the wolves and hyænas as they glided, like
shadows, from one thicket to another. Towards morning, we arrived
at a village called Kimmoo, where our guides awakened one of their
acquaintances, and we stopped to give the asses some corn, and roast
a few ground-nuts for ourselves. At daylight we resumed our journey,
and in the afternoon arrived at Joag in the kingdom of Kajaaga.

Being now in a country, and among a people, differing in many respects
from those that have as yet fallen under our observation, I shall,
before I proceed further, give some account of Bondou (the territory
we have left), and its inhabitants, the Foulahs, the description of
whom I purposely reserved for this part of my work.

Bondou is bounded on the east by Bambouk; on the south-east, and south,
by Tenda, and the Simbani Wilderness; on the south-west by Woolli;
on the west, by Foota Torra; and on the north, by Kajaaga.

The country, like that of Woolli, is very generally covered with
woods, but the land is more elevated, and towards the Falemé river,
rises into considerable hills. In native fertility the soil is not
surpassed, I believe, by any part of Africa.

From the central situation of Bondou, between the Gambia and Senegal
rivers, it is become a place of great resort, both for the Slatees,
who generally pass through it, in going from the coast to the interior
countries; and for occasional traders, who frequently come hither
from the inland countries, to purchase salt.

These different branches of commerce are conducted principally by
Mandingoes and Serawoollies, who have settled in the country. These
merchants likewise carry on a considerable trade with Gedumah, and
other Moorish countries, bartering corn and blue cotton clothes for
salt; which they again barter in Dentila and other districts for iron,
shea-butter, and small quantities of gold-dust. They likewise sell
a variety of sweet smelling gums packed up in small bags, containing
each about a pound. These gums, being thrown on hot embers, produce
a very pleasant odour, and are used by the Mandingoes for perfuming
their huts and clothes.

The customs, or duties on travellers, are very heavy; in almost
every town an ass load pays a bar of European merchandize, and at
Fatteconda, the residence of the king, one Indian baft, or a musket,
and six bottles of gunpowder, are exacted as the common tribute. By
means of these duties, the King of Bondou is well supplied with arms
and ammunition; a circumstance which makes him formidable to the
neighbouring states.

The inhabitants differ in their complexions and national manners
from the Mandingoes and Serawoollies, with whom they are frequently
at war. Some years ago the King of Bondou crossed the Falemé river
with a numerous army, and after a short and bloody campaign totally
defeated the forces of Samboo King of Bambouk, who was obliged to sue
for peace, and surrender to him all the towns along the eastern bank
of the Falemé.

The Foulahs in general (as has been observed in a former Chapter)
are of a tawny complexion, with small features, and soft silky hair;
next to the Mandingoes they are undoubtedly the most considerable
of all the nations in this part of Africa. Their original country
is said to be Fooladoo (which signifies the country of the Foulahs);
but they possess at present many other kingdoms at a great distance
from each other: their complexion, however, is not exactly the same
in the different districts; in Bondou, and the other kingdoms which
are situated in the vicinity of the Moorish territories, they are of
a more yellow complexion than in the southern states.

The Foulahs of Bondou are naturally of a mild and gentle disposition,
but the uncharitable maxims of the Koran has made them less
hospitable to strangers, and more reserved in their behaviour than
the Mandingoes. They evidently consider all the Negro natives as
their inferiors; and when talking of different nations, always rank
themselves among the white people.

Their government differs from that of the Mandingoes chiefly in this,
that they are more immediately under the influence of the Mahomedan
laws; for all the chief men (the king excepted) and a large majority of
the inhabitants of Bondou, are Mussulmen, and the authority and laws
of the Prophet, are every where looked upon as sacred and decisive. In
the exercise of their faith, however, they are not very intolerant
towards such of their countrymen as still retain their ancient
superstitions. Religious persecution is not known among them, nor
is it necessary; for the system of Mahomet is made to extend itself
by means abundantly more efficacious. By establishing small schools
in the different towns, where many of the Pagan as well as Mahomedan
children are taught to read the Koran, and instructed in the tenets of
the Prophet, the Mahomedan priests fix a bias on the minds, and form
the character of their young disciples, which no accidents of life
can ever afterwards remove or alter. Many of these little schools I
visited in my progress through the country, and observed with pleasure
the great docility and submissive deportment of the children, and
heartily wished they had had better instructors, and a purer religion.

With the Mahomedan faith is also introduced the Arabic language,
with which most of the Foulahs have a slight acquaintance. Their
native tongue abounds very much in liquids, but there is something
unpleasant in the manner of pronouncing it. A stranger on hearing
the common conversation of two Foulahs, would imagine that they were
scolding each other. Their numerals are these:—

  One     ---   _Go_.

  Two     ---   _Deeddee_.

  Three   ---   _Tettee_.

  Four    ---   _Nee_.

  Five    ---   _Jouee_.

  Six     ---   _Jego_.

  Seven   ---   _Jedeeddee_.

  Eight   ---   _Je Tettee_.

  Nine    ---   _Je Nee_.

  Ten     ---   _Sappo_.

The industry of the Foulahs, in the occupations of pasturage and
agriculture, is every where remarkable. Even on the banks of the
Gambia, the greater part of the corn is raised by them; and their
herds and flocks are more numerous and in better condition than those
of the Mandingoes; but in Bondou they are opulent in a high degree,
and enjoy all the necessaries of life in the greatest profusion. They
display great skill in the management of their cattle, making them
extremely gentle by kindness and familiarity. On the approach of
night, they are collected from the woods, and secured in folds,
called korrees, which are constructed in the neighbourhood of the
different villages. In the middle of each korree is erected a small
hut, wherein one or two of the herdsmen keep watch during the night,
to prevent the cattle from being stolen, and to keep up the fires
which are kindled round the korree to frighten away the wild beasts.

The cattle are milked in the mornings and evenings: the milk is
excellent; but the quantity obtained from any one cow is by no means
so great as in Europe. The Foulahs use the milk chiefly as an article
of diet, and that, not until it is quite sour. The cream which it
affords is very thick, and is converted into butter by stirring it
violently in a large calabash. This butter, when melted over a gentle
fire, and freed from impurities, is preserved in small earthen pots,
and forms a part in most of their dishes; it serves likewise to anoint
their heads, and is bestowed very liberally on their faces and arms.

But although milk is plentiful, it is somewhat remarkable that the
Foulahs, and indeed all the inhabitants of this part of Africa,
are totally unacquainted with the art of making cheese. A firm
attachment to the customs of their ancestors, makes them view with
an eye of prejudice every thing that looks like innovation. The heat
of the climate, and the great scarcity of salt, are held forth as
unanswerable objections; and the whole process appears to them too
long and troublesome, to be attended with any solid advantage.

Besides the cattle, which constitute the chief wealth of the Foulahs,
they possess some excellent horses, the breed of which seems to be
a mixture of the Arabian with the original African.


[Footnote 8: These are a sort of travelling bards and musicians,
who sing extempore songs in praise of those who employ them. A fuller
account of them will be given hereafter.]




                               CHAPTER V.                               

_Account of Kajaaga. — Serawoollies — their Manners and
Language. — Account of Joag. — The Author is ill treated, and
robbed of half of his Effects, by Order of Batcheri, the King. —
Charity of a female Slave. — The Author is visited by Demba Sego,
Nephew of the King of Kasson, who offers to conduct him in safety to
that Kingdom. — Offer accepted. — The Author and his Protector,
with a numerous Retinue, set out and reach Samee, on the Banks of
the Senegal. — Proceed to Kayee, and crossing the Senegal, arrive
in the Kingdom of Kasson._


The kingdom of Kajaaga, in which I was now arrived, is called by the
French, Gallam; but the name that I have adopted is universally used
by the natives. This country is bounded on the south-east and south
by Bambouk; on the west by Bondou and Foota Torra; and on the north
by the river Senegal.

The air and climate are, I believe, more pure and salubrious than at
any of the settlements towards the Coast; the face of the country is
every where interspersed with a pleasing variety of hills and vallies;
and the windings of the Senegal river, which descends from the rocky
hills of the interior, make the scenery on its banks very picturesque
and beautiful.

The inhabitants are called Serawoollies, or (as the French write it)
_Seracolets_. Their complexion is a jet black: they are not to be
distinguished in this respect from the Jaloffs.

The government is monarchical; and the regal authority, from what I
experienced of it, seems to be sufficiently formidable. The people
themselves, however, complain of no oppression; and seemed all very
anxious to support the king, in a contest he was going to enter into
with the sovereign of Kasson. The Serawoollies are habitually a trading
people; they formerly carried on a great commerce with the French,
in gold and slaves, and still maintain some traffic in slaves with
the British factories on the Gambia. They are reckoned tolerably fair
and just in their dealings, but are indefatigable in their exertions
to acquire wealth, and they derive considerable profits by the sale
of salt, and cotton cloth, in distant countries. When a Serawoolli
merchant returns home from a trading expedition, the neighbours
immediately assemble to congratulate him upon his arrival. On these
occasions the traveller displays his wealth and liberality, by making
a few presents to his friends; but if he has been unsuccessful,
his levee is soon over; and every one looks upon him as a man of no
understanding, who could perform a long journey, and (as they express
it) _bring back nothing but the hair upon his head_.

Their language abounds much in gutturals, and is not so harmonious
as that spoken by the Foulahs: it is, however, well worth acquiring
by those who travel through this part of the African continent; it
being very generally understood in the kingdoms of Kasson, Kaarta,
Ludamar, and the northern parts of Bambara. In all these countries
the Serawoollies are the chief traders. Their numerals are,

  One      ---   _Bani_.

  Two      ---   _Fillo_.

  Three    ---   _Sicco_.

  Four     ---   _Narrato_.

  Five     ---   _Karrago_.

  Six      ---   _Toomo_.

  Seven    ---   _Nero_.

  Eight    ---   _Sego_.

  Nine     ---   _Kabbo_.

  Ten      ---   _Tamo_.

  Twenty   ---   _Tamo di fillo_.

We arrived at Joag, the frontier town of this kingdom on the 24th of
December; and took up our residence at the house of the chief man,
who is here no longer known by the title of _Alkaid_, but is called
the _Dooty_. He was a rigid Mahomedan, but distinguished for his
hospitality. This town may be supposed, on a gross computation, to
contain two thousand inhabitants. It is surrounded by a high wall,
in which are a number of port holes, for musquetry to fire through,
in case of an attack. Every man’s possession is likewise surrounded
by a wall; the whole forming so many distinct citadels; and amongst
a people unacquainted with the use of artillery, these walls answer
all the purposes of stronger fortifications. To the westward of the
town is a small river, on the banks of which the natives raise great
plenty of tobacco and onions.

The same evening Madiboo the Bushreen, who had accompanied me from
Pisania, went to pay a visit to his father and mother, who dwelt
at a neighbouring town called Dramanet. He was joined by my other
attendant the blacksmith; and as soon as it was dark, I was invited
to see the sports of the inhabitants, it being their custom on the
arrival of strangers, to welcome them by diversions of different
kinds. I found a great crowd surrounding a party who were dancing,
by the light of some large fires, to the music of four drums, which
were beat with great exactness and uniformity. The dances, however,
consisted more in wanton gestures, than in muscular exertion or
graceful attitudes. The ladies vied with each other in displaying
the most voluptuous movements imaginable.

December 25th. About two o’clock in the morning a number of horsemen
came into the town, and having awakened my landlord, talked to him for
some time in the Serawoolli tongue; after which they dismounted, and
came to the Bentang on which I had made my bed. One of them thinking
that I was asleep, attempted to steal the musket that lay by me on the
mat; but finding that he could not effect his purpose undiscovered,
he desisted; and the strangers sat down by me till daylight.

I could now easily perceive, by the countenance of my interpreter,
Johnson, that something very unpleasant was in agitation. I
was likewise surprised to see Madiboo and the blacksmith so soon
returned. On inquiring the reason, Madiboo informed me that as they
were dancing at Dramanet, ten horsemen belonging to Batcheri, king of
the country, with his second son at their head, had arrived there,
inquiring if the white man had passed; and on being told that I
was at Joag, they rode off without stopping. Madiboo added, that on
hearing this, he and the blacksmith hastened back to give me notice
of their coming. Whilst I was listening to this narrative, the ten
horsemen mentioned by Madiboo arrived; and coming to the Bentang,
dismounted and seated themselves with those who had come before, the
whole being about twenty in number, forming a circle round me, and each
man holding his musket in his hand. I took this opportunity to observe
to my landlord, that as I did not understand the Serawoolli tongue,
I hoped, whatever the men had to say, they would speak in Mandingo. To
this they agreed, and a short man, loaded with a remarkable number of
saphies, opened the business in a very long harangue, informing me that
I had entered the king’s town without having first paid the duties,
or giving any present to the king, and that, according to the laws
of the country, my people, cattle, and baggage were forfeited. He
added, that they had received orders from the king to conduct me to
Maana,[9] the place of his residence; and if I refused to come with
them, their orders were to bring me by force; upon his saying which,
all of them rose up and asked me if I was ready. It would have been
equally vain and imprudent in me to have resisted or irritated such a
body of men; I therefore affected to comply with their commands, and
begged them only to stop a little until I had given my horse a feed
of corn, and settled matters with my landlord. The poor blacksmith,
who was a native of Kasson, mistook this feigned compliance for a real
intention, and taking me away from the company, told me, that he had
always behaved towards me as if I had been his father and master; and
he hoped I would not entirely ruin him, by going to Maana; adding,
that as there was every reason to believe a war would soon take
place between Kasson and Kajaaga, he should not only lose his little
property, the savings of four years’ industry, but should certainly
be detained and sold as a slave, unless his friends had an opportunity
of paying two slaves for his redemption. I saw this reasoning in its
full force, and determined to do my utmost to preserve the blacksmith
from so dreadful a fate. I therefore told the king’s son that I was
ready to go with him, upon condition that the blacksmith, who was an
inhabitant of a distant kingdom, and entirely unconnected with me,
should be allowed to stay at Joag, till my return; to this they all
objected, and insisted that as we had all acted contrary to the laws,
we were all equally answerable for our conduct.

I now took my landlord aside, and giving him a small present of
gunpowder, asked his advice in so critical a situation: he was
decidedly of opinion that I ought not to go to the king: he was fully
convinced, he said, that if the king should discover any thing valuable
in my possession, he would not be over scrupulous about the means of
obtaining it. This made me the more solicitous to conciliate matters
with the king’s people; and I began by observing, that what I had
done did not proceed from any want of respect towards the king, nor
from any wish to violate his laws, but wholly from my own inexperience
and ignorance, being a stranger, totally unacquainted with the laws and
customs of their country; I had indeed entered the king’s frontier,
without knowing that I was to pay the duties beforehand, but I was
ready to pay them now: which I thought was all they could reasonably
demand. I then tendered them, as a present to the king, the five drams
of gold which the King of Bondou had given me; this they accepted, but
insisted on examining my baggage, which I opposed in vain. The bundles
were opened; but the men were much disappointed in not finding in them
so much gold and amber as they expected: they made up the deficiency,
however, by taking whatever things they fancied; and after wrangling
and debating with me till sunset, they departed; having first robbed
me of half my goods. These proceedings dispirited my people, and
our fortitude was not strengthened by a very indifferent supper,
after a long fast. Madiboo begged me to turn back; Johnson laughed
at the thoughts of proceeding without money, and the blacksmith was
afraid to be seen, or even to speak, lest any one should discover him
to be a native of Kasson. In this disposition, we passed the night
by the side of a dim fire, and our situation the next day was very
perplexing: it was impossible to procure provisions without money,
and I knew that if I produced any beads or amber, the king would
immediately hear of it, and I should probably lose the few effects I
had concealed. We therefore resolved to combat hunger for the day; and
wait some favourable opportunity of purchasing or begging provisions.

Towards evening, as I was sitting upon the Bentang, chewing straws,
an old female slave, passing by with a basket upon her head, asked
me _if I had got my dinner_. As I thought she only laughed at me,
I gave her no answer; but my boy, who was sitting close by, answered
for me; and told her, that the King’s people had robbed me of all my
money. On hearing this, the good old woman, with a look of unaffected
benevolence, immediately took the basket from her head, and shewing
me that it contained ground-nuts, asked me if I could eat them; being
answered in the affirmative, she presented me with a few handfuls,
and walked away, before I had time to thank her for this seasonable
supply. This trifling circumstance gave me peculiar satisfaction. I
reflected with pleasure on the conduct of this poor untutored slave,
who, without examining into my character or circumstances, listened
implicitly to the dictates of her own heart. Experience had taught her
that hunger was painful, and her own distresses made her commiserate
those of others.

The old woman had scarcely left me, when I received information that
a nephew of Demba Sego Jalla, the Mandingo King of Kasson, was coming
to pay me a visit. He had been sent on an embassy to Batcheri, King of
Kajaaga, to endeavour to settle the disputes which had arisen between
his uncle and the latter; but after debating the matter four days
without success, he was now on his return; and hearing that a white
man was at Joag, in his way to Kasson, curiosity brought him to see
me. I represented to him my situation and distresses; when he frankly
offered me his protection, and said he would be my guide to Kasson
(provided I would set out the next morning), and be answerable for my
safety. I readily and gratefully accepted his offer; and was ready,
with my attendants, by daylight on the morning of the 27th of December.

My protector, whose name was Demba Sego, probably after his uncle,
had a numerous retinue. Our company at leaving Joag, consisted of
thirty persons and six loaded asses; and we rode on cheerfully enough
for some hours, without any remarkable occurrence, until we came to a
species of tree, for which my interpreter, Johnson, had made frequent
inquiry. On finding it, he desired us to stop; and producing a white
chicken, which he had purchased at Joag for the purpose, he tied it by
the leg to one of the branches, and then told us we might now safely
proceed, for that our journey would be prosperous. This circumstance
is mentioned merely to illustrate the disposition of the Negroes, and
to shew the power of superstition over their minds; for although this
man had resided seven years in England, it was evident that he still
retained the prejudices and notions he had imbibed in his youth. He
meant this ceremony, he told me, as an offering, or sacrifice, to the
spirits of the woods; who were, he said, a powerful race of beings
of a white colour, with long flowing hair. I laughed at his folly,
but could not condemn the piety of his motives.

At noon we had reached Gungadi, a large town, where we stopped about an
hour, until some of the asses that had fallen behind came up. Here I
observed a number of date trees, and a mosque built of clay, with six
turrets, on the pinnacles of which were placed six ostrich eggs. A
little before sunset we arrived at the town of Samee, on the banks
of the Senegal, which is here a beautiful, but shallow river, moving
slowly over a bed of sand and gravel. The banks are high, and covered
with verdure; the country is open and cultivated; and the rocky hills
of Felow and Bambouk, add much to the beauty of the landscape.

December 28. We departed from Samee, and arrived in the afternoon
at Kayee, a large village, part of which is situated on the north,
and part on the south side of the river. A little above this place
is a considerable cataract, where the river flows over a ledge
of whin-stone rock, with great force: below this, the river is
remarkably black and deep; and here it was proposed to make our
cattle swim over. After hollooing, and firing some muskets, the
people on the Kasson side observed us, and brought over a canoe to
carry our baggage. I did not, however, think it possible to get the
cattle down the bank, which is here more than forty feet above the
water; but the Negroes seized the horses, and launched them one at a
time, down a sort of trench or gully, that was almost perpendicular,
and seemed to have been worn smooth by this sort of use. After the
terrified cattle had been plunged in this manner to the waters edge,
every man got down as well as he could. The ferryman then taking hold
of the most steady of the horses by a rope, led him into the water,
and paddled the canoe a little from the brink; upon which a general
attack commenced upon the other horses, who finding themselves pelted
and kicked on all sides, unanimously plunged into the river, and
followed their companion. A few boys swam in after them; and by laving
water upon them when they attempted to return, urged them onwards;
and we had the satisfaction, in about fifteen minutes, to see them
all safe on the other side. It was a matter of greater difficulty to
manage the asses: their natural stubbornness of disposition made them
endure a great deal of pelting and shoving before they would venture
into the water; and when they had reached the middle of the stream,
four of them turned back, in spite of every exertion to get them
forwards. Two hours were spent in getting the whole of them over;
an hour more was employed in transporting the baggage; and it was
near sunset before the canoe returned, when Demba Sego and myself
embarked in this dangerous passage-boat, which the least motion was
like to overset. The king’s nephew thought this a proper time to
have a peep into a tin box of mine, that stood in the fore part of
the canoe; and in stretching out his hand for it, he unfortunately
destroyed the equilibrium, and overset the canoe. Luckily we were
not far advanced, and got back to the shore without much difficulty;
from whence, after wringing the water from our clothes, we took a
fresh departure, and were soon afterwards safely landed in Kasson.


[Footnote 9: Maana is within a short distance of the ruins of Fort
St. Joseph, on the Senegal river, formerly a French factory.]




                              CHAPTER VI.                               

_Arrival at Teesee. — Interview with Tiggity Sego, the King’s
Brother — the Author’s Detention at Teesee — some Account
of that Place and its Inhabitants — Incidents which occurred
there. — Rapacious Conduct of Tiggity Sego toward the Author on his
Departure. — Sets out for Kooniakary, the Capital of the Kingdom. —
Incidents on the Road, and Arrival at Kooniakary._


We no sooner found ourselves safe in Kasson, than Demba Sego told
me that we were now in his uncle’s dominions, and he hoped I would
consider, being now out of danger, the obligation I owed to him, and
make him a suitable return for the trouble he had taken on my account
by a handsome present. This, as he knew how much had been pilfered
from me at Joag, was rather an unexpected proposition; and I began to
fear that I had not much improved my condition by crossing the water,
but as it would have been folly to complain, I made no observation
upon his conduct, and gave him seven bars of amber, and some tobacco;
with which he seemed to be content.

After a long day’s journey, in the course of which I observed a
number of large loose nodules of white granite, we arrived at Teesee
on the evening of Dec. 29th, and were accommodated in Demba Sego’s
hut. The next morning he introduced me to his father Tiggity Sego,
brother to the King of Kasson, chief of Teesee. The old man viewed
me with great earnestness, having never, he said, beheld but one
white man before, whom by his description I immediately knew to
be Major Houghton. I related to him, in answer to his inquiries,
the motives that induced me to explore the country. But he seemed
to doubt the truth of what I asserted; thinking, I believe, that I
secretly meditated some project which I was afraid to avow. He told
me, it would be necessary I should go to Kooniakary, the residence
of the king, to pay my respects to that prince; but desired me to
come to him again before I left Teesee.

In the afternoon one of his slaves eloped; and a general alarm
being given, every person that had a horse rode into the woods,
in the hopes of apprehending him; and Demba Sego begged the use of
my horse for the same purpose. I readily consented; and in about an
hour they all returned with the slave, who was severely flogged, and
afterwards put in irons. On the day following (Dec. 31.) Demba Sego
was ordered to go with twenty horsemen to a town in Gedumah, to adjust
some dispute with the Moors, a party of whom were supposed to have
stolen three horses from Teesee. Demba begged, a second time, the use
of my horse; adding, that the sight of my bridle and saddle would give
him consequence among the Moors. This request also I readily granted,
and he promised to return at the end of three days. During his absence
I amused myself with walking about the town, and conversing with the
natives, who attended me every where with great kindness and curiosity,
and supplied me with milk, eggs, and what other provisions I wanted,
on very easy terms.

Teesee is a large unwalled town, having no security against the
attack of an enemy, except a sort of citadel, in which Tiggity and
his family constantly reside. This town, according to the report of
the natives, was formerly inhabited only by a few Foulah shepherds,
who lived in considerable affluence by means of the excellent meadows
in the neighbourhood, in which they reared great herds of cattle. But
their prosperity attracting the envy of some Mandingoes, the latter
drove out the shepherds, and took possession of their lands.

The present inhabitants, though they possess both cattle and corn
in abundance, are not over nice in articles of diet; rats, moles,
squirrels, snakes, locusts, &c. are eaten without scruple by the
highest and lowest. My people were one evening invited to a feast
given by some of the townsmen, where, after making a hearty meal
of what they thought fish and kouskous, one of them found a piece
of hard skin in the dish, and brought it along with him, to shew
me what sort of fish they had been eating. On examining the skin,
I found they had been feasting on a large snake. Another custom
still more extraordinary, is that no woman is allowed _to eat an
egg_. This prohibition, whether arising from ancient superstition,
or from the craftiness of some old Bushreen who loved eggs himself,
is rigidly adhered to, and nothing will more affront a woman of Teesee
than to offer her an egg. The custom is the more singular, as the men
eat eggs without scruple in the presence of their wives, and I never
observed the same prohibition in any other of the Mandingo countries.

The third day after his son’s departure, Tiggity Sego held a palaver
on a very extraordinary occasion, which I attended; and the debates
on both sides of the question displayed much ingenuity. The case was
this. A young man, a Kafir, of considerable affluence, who had recently
married a young and handsome wife, applied to a very devout Bushreen,
or Mussulman priest, of his acquaintance, to procure him saphies for
his protection during the approaching war. The Bushreen complied with
the request; and in order, as he pretended, to render the saphies more
efficacious, enjoined the young man to avoid any nuptial intercourse
with his bride for the space of six weeks. Severe as the injunction
was, the Kafir strictly obeyed; and without telling his wife the
real cause, absented himself from her company. In the mean time
it began to be whispered at Teesee, that the Bushreen, who always
performed his evening devotions at the door of the Kafir’s hut,
was more intimate with the young wife than he ought to be. At first,
the good husband was unwilling to suspect the honour of his sanctified
friend, and one whole month elapsed before any jealousy rose in his
mind; but hearing the charge repeated, he at last interrogated his
wife on the subject, who frankly confessed that the Bushreen had
seduced her. Hereupon the Kafir put her into confinement, and called
a palaver upon the Bushreen’s conduct. The fact was clearly proved
against him; and he was sentenced to be sold into slavery, or to
find two slaves for his redemption, according to the pleasure of the
complainant. The injured husband, however, was unwilling to proceed
against his friend to such extremity, and desired rather to have him
publicly flogged before Tiggity Sego’s gate. This was agreed to,
and the sentence was immediately executed. The culprit was tied by the
hands to a strong stake; and a long black rod being brought forth,
the executioner, after flourishing it round his head for some time,
applied it with such force and dexterity to the Bushreen’s back,
as to make him roar until the woods resounded with his screams. The
surrounding multitude, by their hooting and laughing, manifested
how much they enjoyed the punishment of this old gallant; and it is
worthy of remark, that the number of stripes was precisely the same
as are enjoined by the Mosaic law, _forty, save one_.

As there appeared great probability that Teesee, from its being a
frontier town, would be much exposed during the war to the predatory
excursions of the Moors of Gadumah, Tiggity Sego had, before my
arrival, sent round to the neighbouring villages, to beg or to purchase
as much provisions as would afford subsistence to the inhabitants for
one whole year, independently of the crop on the ground, which the
Moors might destroy. This project was well received by the country
people, and they fixed a day on which to bring all the provisions
they could spare to Teesee, and as my horse was not yet returned,
I went, in the afternoon of January 4th, 1796, to meet the escort
with the provisions.

It was composed of about 400 men, marching in good order, with corn and
ground nuts in large calabashes upon their heads. They were preceded by
a strong guard of bowmen, and followed by eight musicians or singing
men. As soon as they approached the town, the latter began a song,
every verse of which was answered by the company, and succeeded by
a few strokes on the large drums. In this manner they proceeded,
amidst the acclamations of the populace, till they reached the house
of Tiggity Sego, where the loads were deposited; and in the evening
they all assembled under the Bentang tree, and spent the night in
dancing and merriment. Many of these strangers remained at Teesee for
three days, during which time I was constantly attended by as many of
them as could conveniently see me; one party giving way to another,
as soon as curiosity was gratified.

On the 5th of January an embassy of ten people belonging to Almami
Abdulkader, King of Foota Torra, a country to the west of Bondou,
arrived at Teesee; and desiring Tiggity Sego to call an assembly of
the inhabitants, announced publicly their king’s determination, to
this effect: “That unless all the people of Kasson would embrace the
Mahomedan religion, and evince their conversion by saying eleven public
prayers, he (the King of Foota Torra) could not possibly stand neuter
in the present contest, but would certainly join his arms to those of
Kajaaga.” A message of this nature, from so powerful a prince, could
not fail to create great alarm; and the inhabitants of Teesee, after a
long consultation, agreed to conform to his good pleasure, humiliating
as it was to them. Accordingly, one and all publicly offered up eleven
prayers, which were considered a sufficient testimony of their having
renounced Paganism, and embraced the doctrines of the Prophet.

It was the 8th of January before Demba Sego returned with my horse;
and being quite wearied out with the delay, I went immediately to
inform his father, that I should set out for Kooniakary early the
next day. The old man made many frivolous objections; and at length
gave me to understand, that I must not think of departing, without
first paying him the same duties he was entitled to receive from all
travellers; besides which, he expected, he said, some acknowledgment
for his kindness towards me. Accordingly, on the morning of the 9th,
my friend Demba, with a number of people, came to me, and said that
they were sent by Tiggity Sego for my present, and wished to see what
goods I had appropriated for that purpose. I knew that resistance was
hopeless, and complaint unavailing; and being in some measure prepared,
by the intimation I had received the night before, I quietly offered
him seven bars of amber, and five of tobacco. After surveying these
articles for some time very coolly, Demba laid them down, and told
me, this was not a present for a man of Tiggity Sego’s consequence,
who had it in his power to take whatever he pleased from me. He added,
that if I did not consent to make him a larger offering, he would carry
all my baggage to his father, and let him choose for himself. I had
no time for reply; for Demba and his attendants immediately began to
open my bundles, and spread the different articles upon the floor,
where they underwent a more strict examination than they had done
at Joag. Every thing that pleased them, they took without scruple;
and amongst other things, Demba seized the tin box, which had so much
attracted his attention in crossing the river. Upon collecting the
scattered remains of my little fortune after these people had left
me, I found that, as at Joag, I had been plundered of half, so here,
without even the shadow of accusation, I was deprived of half the
remainder. The blacksmith himself, though a native of Kasson, had also
been compelled to open his bundles, and take an oath that the different
articles they contained were his own exclusive property. There was,
however, no remedy; and having been under some obligation to Demba
Sego for his attention towards me in the journey from Joag, I did
not reproach him for his rapacity, but determined to quit Teesee at
all events the next morning. In the meanwhile, in order to raise the
drooping spirits of my attendants, I purchased a fat sheep, and had
it dressed for our dinner.

Early in the morning of January 10th, therefore, I left Teesee, and
about mid-day ascended a ridge, from whence we had a distant view of
the hills round Kooniakary. In the evening we reached a small village
where we slept, and departing from thence the next morning, crossed in
a few hours a narrow but deep stream called Krieko, a branch of the
Senegal. About two miles farther to the eastward, we passed a large
town called Madina; and at two o’clock came in sight of Jumbo, the
blacksmith’s native town, from whence he had been absent more than
four years. Soon after this his brother, who had by some means been
apprized of his coming, came out to meet him, accompanied by a singing
man: he brought a horse for the blacksmith, that he might enter his
native town in a dignified manner; and he desired each of us to put
a good charge of powder into our guns. The singing man now led the
way, followed by the two brothers; and we were presently joined by a
number of people from the town, all of whom demonstrated great joy at
seeing their old acquaintance the blacksmith, by the most extravagant
jumping and singing. On entering the town, the singing man began an
extempore song in praise of the blacksmith, extolling his courage in
having overcome so many difficulties; and concluding with a strict
injunction to his friends to dress him plenty of victuals.

When we arrived at the blacksmith’s place of residence, we
dismounted and fired our muskets. The meeting between him and his
relations was very tender; for these rude children of nature, free from
restraint, display their emotions in the strongest and most expressive
manner. Amidst these transports, the blacksmith’s aged mother was
led forth, leaning upon a staff. Every one made way for her; and she
stretched out her hand to bid her son welcome. Being totally blind,
she stroked his hands, arms, and face, with great care, and seemed
highly delighted that her latter days were blessed by his return,
and that her ears once more heard the music of his voice. From this
interview I was fully convinced, that whatever difference there is
between the Negro and European in the conformation of the nose and
the colour of the skin, there is none in the genuine sympathies and
characteristic feelings of our common nature.

During the tumult of these congratulations, I had seated myself apart,
by the side of one of the huts, being unwilling to interrupt the flow
of filial and parental tenderness; and the attention of the company
was so entirely taken up with the blacksmith, that I believe none of
his friends had observed me. When all the people present had seated
themselves, the blacksmith was desired by his father to give them some
account of his adventures; and silence being commanded, he began;
and after repeatedly thanking God for the success that had attended
him, related every material occurrence that had happened to him from
his leaving Kasson to his arrival at the Gambia; his employment and
success in those parts; and the dangers he had escaped in returning
to his native country. In the latter part of his narration, he had
frequently occasion to mention me; and after many strong expressions
concerning my kindness to him, he pointed to the place where I sat,
and exclaimed, _affille ibi siring_, “see him sitting there.” In a
moment all eyes were turned upon me; I appeared like a being dropped
from the clouds; every one was surprised that they had not observed
me before; and a few women and children expressed great uneasiness
at being so near a man of such an uncommon appearance. By degrees,
however, their apprehensions subsided; and when the blacksmith assured
them that I was perfectly inoffensive, and would hurt nobody, some
of them ventured so far as to examine the texture of my clothes;
but many of them were still very suspicious; and when by accident I
happened to move myself, or look at the young children, their mothers
would scamper off with them with the greatest precipitation. In a
few hours, however, they all became reconciled to me.

With these worthy people I spent the remainder of that, and the whole
of the ensuing day, in feasting and merriment; and the blacksmith
declared he would not quit me during my stay at Kooniakary, for
which place we set out early on the morning of the 14th of January,
and arrived about the middle of the day at Soolo, a small village
three miles to the south of it.

As this place was somewhat out of the direct road, it is necessary
to observe, that I went thither to visit a Slatee, or Gambia trader,
of great note and reputation, named Salim Daucari. He was well known
to Dr. Laidley, who had trusted him with effects to the value of
five slaves, and had given me an order for the whole of the debt. We
luckily found him at home, and he received me with great kindness
and attention.

It is remarkable, however, that the King of Kasson was, by some means,
immediately apprized of my motions; for I had been at Soolo but a
few hours, before Sambo Sego, his second son, came thither with a
party of horse, to inquire what had prevented me from proceeding to
Kooniakary, and waiting immediately upon the king, who, he said, was
impatient to see me. Salim Daucari made my apology, and promised to
accompany me to Kooniakary the same evening: we accordingly departed
from Soolo at sunset, and in about an hour entered Kooniakary. But
as the king had gone to sleep, we deferred the interview till next
morning, and slept at the hut of Sambo Sego.

My interview with the king, and the incidents which occurred to me
in the kingdoms of Kasson and Kaarta, will be the subject of the
ensuing Chapter.




                              CHAPTER VII.                              

_The Author admitted to an Audience of the King of Kasson, whom he
finds well disposed towards him. — Incidents during the Author’s
stay at Kooniakary. — Departs thence for Kemmoo, the Capital of
Kaarta. — Is received with great kindness by the King of Kaarta, who
dissuades him from prosecuting his Journey, on Account of approaching
Hostilities with the King of Bambarra. — The Author determines,
notwithstanding, to proceed; and the usual Routes being obstructed,
takes the Path to Ludamar, a Moorish Kingdom. — Is accommodated
by the King with a Guide to Jarra, the frontier Town of the Moorish
Territories; and sets out for that Place, accompanied by Three of
the King’s Sons, and 200 Horsemen._


About eight o’clock in the morning of January 15, 1796, we went to an
audience of the king (Demba Sego Jalla); but the crowd of people to see
me was so great, that I could scarcely get admittance. A passage being
at length obtained, I made my bow to the monarch, whom we found sitting
upon a mat, in a large hut: he appeared to be a man of about sixty
years of age: his success in war, and the mildness of his behaviour
in time of peace, had much endeared him to all his subjects. He
surveyed me with great attention; and when Salim Daucari explained
to him the object of my journey, and my reasons for passing through
his country, the good old king appeared not only perfectly satisfied,
but promised me every assistance in his power. He informed me that
he had seen Major Houghton, and presented him with a white horse;
but that after crossing the kingdom of Kaarta, he had lost his life
among the Moors; in what manner he could not inform me. When this
audience was ended we returned to our lodging, and I made up a small
present for the king, out of the few effects that were left me; for
I had not yet received any thing from Salim Daucari. This present,
though inconsiderable in itself, was well received by the king, who
sent me in return a large white bullock. The sight of this animal quite
delighted my attendants; not so much on account of its bulk, as from
its being of a white colour; which is considered as a particular mark
of favour. But although the king himself was well disposed towards me,
and readily granted me permission to pass through his territories,
I soon discovered that very great and unexpected obstacles were
likely to impede my progress. Besides the war which was on the point
of breaking out between Kasson and Kajaaga, I was told that the next
kingdom of Kaarta, through which my route lay, was involved in the
issue; and was furthermore threatened with hostilities on the part
of Bambarra. The king himself informed me of these circumstances; and
advised me to stay in the neighbourhood of Kooniakary, till such time
as he could procure proper information respecting Bambarra, which he
expected to do in the course of four or five days, as he had already,
he said, sent four messengers into Kaarta for that purpose. I readily
submitted to this proposal, and went to Soolo, to stay there till
the return of one of those messengers. This afforded me a favourable
opportunity of receiving what money Salim Daucari could spare me
on Dr. Laidley’s account. I succeeded in receiving the value of
three slaves, chiefly in gold dust; and being anxious to proceed as
quickly as possible, I begged Daucari to use his interest with the
king to allow me a guide by the way of Fooladoo, as I was informed
that the war had already commenced between the Kings of Bambarra and
Kaarta. Daucari accordingly set out for Kooniakary on the morning of
the 20th, and the same evening returned with the king’s answer,
which was to this purpose; that the king had, many years ago, made
an agreement with Daisey, King of Kaarta, to send all merchants and
travellers through his dominions; but that if I wished to take the
route through Fooladoo, I had his permission so to do; though he
could not, consistently with his agreement, lend me a guide. Having
felt the want of regal protection in a former part of my journey,
I was unwilling to hazard a repetition of the hardships I had then
experienced, especially as the money I had received was probably the
last supply that I should obtain; I therefore determined to wait for
the return of the messengers from Kaarta.

In the interim, it began to be whispered abroad that I had received
plenty of gold from Salim Daucari; and on the morning of the 23d,
Sambo Sego paid me a visit with a party of horsemen. He insisted upon
knowing the exact amount of the money I had obtained; declaring,
that whatever the sum was, one half of it must go to the king;
besides which, he intimated that he expected a handsome present for
himself, as being the king’s son; and for his attendants, as being
the king’s relations. The reader will easily perceive, that if all
these demands had been satisfied, I should not have been overburthened
with money; but though it was very mortifying to me to comply with the
demands of injustice, and so arbitrary an exaction, yet, thinking it
was highly dangerous to make a foolish resistance, and irritate the
lion when within the reach of his paw, I prepared to submit; and if
Salim Daucari had not interposed, all my endeavours to mitigate this
oppressive claim would have been of no avail. Salim at last prevailed
upon Sambo to accept sixteen bars of European merchandize, and some
powder and ball, as a complete payment of every demand that could be
made upon me in the kingdom of Kasson.

January 26th, in the forenoon, I went to the top of a high hill to
the southward of Soolo, where I had a most enchanting prospect of
the country. The number of towns and villages, and the extensive
cultivation around them, surpassed every thing I had yet seen
in Africa. A gross calculation may be formed of the number of
inhabitants in this delightful plain, by considering, that the King
of Kasson can raise four thousand fighting men by the sound of his
war drum. In traversing the rocky eminences of this hill, which are
almost destitute of vegetation, I observed a number of large holes in
the crevices and fissures of the rocks, where the wolves and hyenas
take refuge during the day. Some of these animals paid us a visit on
the evening of the 27th; their approach was discovered by the dogs
of the village; and on this occasion it is remarkable, that the dogs
did not bark, but howl in the most dismal manner. The inhabitants
of the village no sooner heard them than, knowing the cause, they
armed themselves; and providing bunches of dry grass, went in a body
to the inclosure in the middle of the village where the cattle were
kept. Here they lighted the bunches of grass, and, waving them to and
fro, ran hooping and hallooing towards the hills. This manœuvre had
the desired effect of frightening the wolves away from the village;
but on examination, we found that they had killed five of the cattle,
and torn and wounded many others.

February 1st. The messengers arrived from Kaarta, and brought
intelligence that the war had not yet commenced between Bambarra
and Kaarta, and that I might probably pass through Kaarta before the
Bambarra army invaded that country.

Feb. 3d. Early in the morning, two guides on horseback came from
Kooniakary to conduct me to the frontiers of Kaarta. I accordingly
took leave of Salim Daucari, and parted for the last time from
my fellow-traveller the blacksmith, whose kind solicitude for my
welfare had been so conspicuous; and about ten o’clock departed
from Soolo. We travelled this day through a rocky and hilly country,
along the banks of the river Krieko, and at sunset came to the village
of Soomoo, where we slept.

Feb. 4th. We departed from Soomoo, and continued our route along
the banks of the Krieko, which are every where well cultivated,
and swarm with inhabitants. At this time they were increased by the
number of people that had flown thither from Kaarta, on account of
the Bambarra war. In the afternoon we reached Kimo, a large village,
the residence of Madi Konko, governor of the hilly country of Kasson,
which is called Sorroma. From hence the guides appointed by the King
of Kasson returned, to join in the expedition against Kajaaga; and I
waited until the 6th, before I could prevail on Madi Konko to appoint
me a guide to Kaarta.

Feb. 7th. Departing from Kimo, with Madi Konko’s son as a guide, we
continued our course along the banks of the Krieko until the afternoon,
when we arrived at Kangee, a considerable town. The Krieko is here but
a small rivulet; this beautiful stream takes its rise a little to the
eastward of this town, and descends with a rapid and noisy current
until it reaches the bottom of the high hill called Tappa, where it
becomes more placid, and winds gently through the lovely plains of
Kooniakary; after which, having received an additional branch from the
north, it is lost in the Senegal, somewhere near the Falls of Felow.

Feb. 8th. This day we travelled over a rough stony country, and having
passed Seimpo and a number of other villages, arrived in the afternoon
at Lackarago, a small village, which stands upon the ridge of hills
that separates the kingdoms of Kasson and Kaarta. In the course of
the day we passed many hundreds of people flying from Kaarta, with
their families and effects.

Feb. 9th. Early in the morning, we departed from Lackarago, and a
little to the eastward came to the brow of a hill, from whence we
had an extensive view of the country. Towards the south-east were
perceived some very distant hills, which our guide told us were the
mountains of Fooladoo. We travelled with great difficulty down a stony
and abrupt precipice, and continued our way in the bed of a dry river
course; where the trees, meeting over head, made the place dark and
cool. In a little time we reached the bottom of this romantic glen,
and about ten o’clock emerged from between two rocky hills, and
found ourselves on the level and sandy plains of Kaarta. At noon we
arrived at a Korree, or watering-place, where, for a few strings
of beads, I purchased as much milk and corn-meal as we could eat;
indeed provisions are here so cheap, and the shepherds live in such
affluence, that they seldom ask any return for what refreshments a
traveller receives from them. From this Korree, we reached Feesurah
at sunset, where we took up our lodging for the night.

Feb. 10th. We continued at Feesurah all this day, to have a few clothes
washed, and learn more exactly the situation of affairs before we
ventured towards the capital.

Feb. 11th. Our landlord, taking advantage of the unsettled state of the
country, demanded so extravagant a sum for our lodging, that suspecting
he wished for an opportunity to quarrel with us, I refused to submit to
his exorbitant demand; but my attendants were so much frightened at the
reports of approaching war, that they refused to proceed any farther,
unless I could settle matters with him, and induce him to accompany us
to Kemmoo, for our protection on the road. This I accomplished with
some difficulty and by a present of a blanket, which I had brought
with me to sleep in, and for which our landlord had conceived a
very great liking, matters were at length amicably adjusted, and he
mounted his horse and led the way. He was one of those Negroes who,
together with the ceremonial part of the Mahomedan religion, retain
all their ancient superstitions, and even drink strong liquors. They
are called Johars, or Jowers, and in this kingdom form a very numerous
and powerful tribe. We had no sooner got into a dark and lonely part
of the first wood, than he made a sign for us to stop, and taking hold
of a hollow piece of bamboo, that hung as an amulet round his neck,
whistled very loud, three times. I confess I was somewhat startled,
thinking it was a signal for some of his companions to come and attack
us; but he assured me that it was done merely with a view to ascertain
what success we were likely to meet with on our present journey. He
then dismounted, laid his spear across the road, and having said a
number of short prayers, concluded with three loud whistles; after
which he listened for some time, as if in expectation of an answer,
and receiving none, told us we might proceed without fear, for there
was no danger. About noon we passed a number of large villages quite
deserted, the inhabitants having fled into Kasson to avoid the horrors
of war. We reached Karankalla at sunset; this formerly was a large
town, but having been plundered by the Bambarrans about four years ago,
nearly one half of it is still in ruins.

Feb. 12th. At daylight, we departed from Karankalla, and as it was but
a short day’s journey to Kemmoo, we travelled slower than usual,
and amused ourselves by collecting such eatable fruits as grew near
the road side. In this pursuit I had wandered a little from my people,
and being uncertain whether they were before or behind me, I hastened
to a rising ground to look about me. As I was proceeding towards this
eminence, two Negro horsemen, armed with muskets, came galloping from
among the bushes: on seeing them I made a full stop; the horsemen did
the same, and all three of us seemed equally surprised and confounded
at this interview. As I approached them their fears increased, and
one of them, after casting upon me a look of horror, rode off at full
speed; the other, in a panic of fear, put his hand over his eyes,
and continued muttering prayers until his horse, seemingly without the
rider’s knowledge, conveyed him slowly after his companion. About a
mile to the westward, they fell in with my attendants, to whom they
related a frightful story: it seems their fears had dressed me in
the flowing robes of a tremendous spirit, and one of them affirmed,
that when I made my appearance, a cold blast of wind came pouring
down upon him from the sky like so much cold water. About noon we saw
at a distance the capital of Kaarta, situated in the middle of an
open plain, the country for two miles round being cleared of wood,
by the great consumption of that article for building and fuel,
and we entered the town about two o’clock in the afternoon.

We proceeded, without stopping, to the court before the King’s
residence; but I was so completely surrounded by the gazing multitude,
that I did not attempt to dismount, but sent in the landlord and
Madi Konko’s son, to acquaint the king of my arrival. In a little
time they returned, accompanied by a messenger from the king,
signifying that he would see me in the evening; and in the mean
time, the messenger had orders to procure me a lodging, and see
that the crowd did not molest me. He conducted me into a court,
at the door of which he stationed a man, with a stick in his hand,
to keep off the mob, and then shewed me a large hut, in which I was
to lodge. I had scarcely seated myself in this spacious apartment,
when the mob entered; it was found impossible to keep them out,
and I was surrounded by as many as the hut could contain. When the
first party, however, had seen me, and asked a few questions, they
retired, to make room for another company; and in this manner the
hut was filled and emptied thirteen different times.

A little before sunset, the king sent to inform me that he was at
leisure, and wished to see me. I followed the messenger through a
number of courts surrounded with high walls, where I observed plenty
of dry grass bundled up like hay, to fodder the horses, in case the
town should be invested. On entering the court in which the king was
sitting, I was astonished at the number of his attendants, and at the
good order that seemed to prevail among them: they were all seated;
the fighting men on the king’s right hand, and the women and children
on the left, leaving a space between them for my passage. The king,
whose name was Daisy Koorabarri, was not to be distinguished from his
subjects by any superiority in point of dress; a bank of earth, about
two feet high, upon which was spread a leopard’s skin, constituted
the only mark of royal dignity. When I had seated myself upon the
ground before him, and related the various circumstances that had
induced me to pass through his country, and my reasons for soliciting
his protection, he appeared perfectly satisfied; but said it was not in
his power at present to afford me much assistance; for that all sort
of communication between Kaarta and Bambarra had been interrupted for
some time past; and as Mansong, the King of Bambarra, with his army,
had entered Fooladoo in his way to Kaarta, there was but little hope of
my reaching Bambarra by any of the usual routes, inasmuch as, coming
from an enemy’s country, I should certainly be plundered, or taken
for a spy. If his country had been at peace, he said, I might have
remained with him until a more favourable opportunity offered; but, as
matters stood at present, he did not wish me to continue in Kaarta, for
fear some accident should befal me, in which case my countrymen might
say that he had murdered a white man. He would therefore advise me to
return into Kasson, and remain there until the war should terminate,
which would probably happen in the course of three or four months;
after which, if he was alive, he said, he would be glad to see me,
and if he was dead, his sons would take care of me.

This advice was certainly well meant on the part of the king; and
perhaps I was to blame in not following it; but I reflected that the
hot months were approaching, and I dreaded the thoughts of spending
the rainy season in the interior of Africa. These considerations,
and the aversion I felt at the idea of returning without having made
a greater progress in discovery, made me determine to go forwards;
and though the king could not give me a guide to Bambarra, I begged
that he would allow a man to accompany me as near the frontiers of his
kingdom as was consistent with safety. Finding that I was determined
to proceed, the king told me that one route still remained, but that,
he said, was by no means free from danger; which was to go from Kaarta
into the Moorish kingdom of Ludamar, from whence I might pass, by a
circuitous route, into Bambarra. If I wished to follow this route,
he would appoint people to conduct me to Jarra, the frontier town of
Ludamar. He then inquired very particularly how I had been treated
since I had left the Gambia, and asked in a jocular way how many
slaves I expected to carry home with me on my return. He was about
to proceed, when a man mounted on a fine Moorish horse, which was
covered with sweat and foam, entered the court, and signifying that
he had something of importance to communicate, the king immediately
took up his sandals, which is the signal to strangers to retire. I
accordingly took leave, but desired my boy to stay about the place, in
order to learn something of the intelligence that this messenger had
brought. In about an hour the boy returned, and informed me that the
Bambarra army had left Fooladoo, and was on its march towards Kaarta;
that the man I had seen, who had brought this intelligence, was one
of the scouts or watchmen employed by the king, each of whom has his
particular station (commonly on some rising ground) from whence he
has the best view of the country, and watches the motions of the enemy.

In the evening the king sent me a fine sheep; which was very
acceptable, as none of us had tasted victuals during the day. Whilst
we were employed in dressing supper, evening prayers were announced;
not by the call of the priest, as usual, but by beating on drums,
and blowing through large elephants’ teeth, hollowed out in such
a manner as to resemble bugle horns; the sound is melodious, and, in
my opinion, comes nearer to the human voice than any other artificial
sound. As the main body of Daisy’s army was, at this juncture, at
Kemmoo, the mosques were very much crowded; and I observed that the
disciples of Mahomet composed nearly one half of the army of Kaarta.

Feb. 13th. At daylight I sent my horse-pistols and holsters as a
present to the king, and being very desirous to get away from a place
which was likely soon to become the seat of war, I begged the messenger
to inform the king that I wished to depart from Kemmoo as soon as he
should find it convenient to appoint me a guide. In about an hour
the king sent his messenger to thank me for the present, and eight
horsemen to conduct me to Jarra. They told me that the king wished
me to proceed to Jarra with all possible expedition, that they might
return before any thing decisive should happen between the armies of
Bambarra and Kaarta; we accordingly departed forthwith from Kemmoo,
accompanied by three of Daisy’s sons, and about two hundred horsemen,
who kindly undertook to see me a little way on my journey.




                             CHAPTER VIII.                              

_Journey from Kemmoo to Funingkedy. — Some Account of the Lotus. —
A Youth murdered by the Moors — interesting Scene at his Death. —
Author passes through Simbing. — Some Particulars concerning Major
Houghton. — Author reaches Jarra — Situation of the surrounding
States at the Period of his Arrival there, and a brief Account of
the War between Kaarta and Bambarra._


On the evening of the day of our departure from Kemmoo, (the
king’s eldest son and great part of the horsemen having returned)
we reached a village called Marina, where we slept. During the night
some thieves broke into the hut where I had deposited my baggage,
and having cut open one of my bundles, stole a quantity of beads,
part of my clothes, and some amber and gold, which happened to be
in one of the pockets. I complained to my protectors, but without
effect. The next day (Feb. 14,) was far advanced before we departed
from Marina, and we travelled slowly, on account of the excessive
heat, until four o’clock in the afternoon, when two Negroes were
observed sitting among some thorny bushes at a little distance from
the road. The king’s people, taking it for granted that they were
runaway slaves, cocked their muskets, and rode at full speed in
different directions through the bushes, in order to surround them,
and prevent their escaping. The Negroes, however, waited with great
composure until we came within bowshot of them, when each of them
took from his quiver a handful of arrows, and putting two between
his teeth and one in his bow, waved to us with his hand to keep at
a distance; upon which one of the king’s people called out to the
strangers to give some account of themselves. They said that “they
were natives of Toorda, a neighbouring village, and had come to that
place to gather _tomberongs_.” These are small farinaceous berries,
of a yellow colour and delicious taste, which I knew to be the fruit
of the _rhamnus lotus_ of Linnæus. The Negroes shewed us two large
baskets full, which they had collected in the course of the day. These
berries are much esteemed by the natives, who convert them into a sort
of bread, by exposing them for some days to the sun, and afterwards
pounding them gently in a wooden mortar, until the farinaceous part of
the berry is separated from the stone. This meal is then mixed with
a little water, and formed into cakes; which, when dried in the sun,
resemble in colour and flavour the sweetest gingerbread. The stones
are afterwards put into a vessel of water, and shaken about so as to
separate the meal which may still adhere to them: this communicates
a sweet and agreeable taste to the water, and with the addition of a
little pounded millet, forms a pleasant gruel called _fondi_, which
is the common breakfast in many parts of Ludamar, during the months
of February and March. The fruit is collected by spreading a cloth
upon the ground, and beating the branches with a stick.

The lotus is very common in all the kingdoms which I visited; but is
found in the greatest plenty on the sandy soil of Kaarta, Ludamar,
and the northern parts of Bambarra, where it is one of the most common
shrubs of the country. I had observed the same species at Gambia,
and had an opportunity to make a drawing of a branch in flower,
of which an engraving is given. The leaves of the desert shrub are,
however, much smaller; and more resembling, in that particular, those
represented in the engraving given by Desfontaines, in the Mémoires
de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 1788, p. 443.

As this shrub is found in Tunis, and also in the Negro kingdoms,
and as it furnishes the natives of the latter with a food resembling
bread, and also with a sweet liquor, which is much relished by them,
there can be little doubt of its being the lotus mentioned by Pliny,
as the food of the Lybian Lotophagi. An army may very well have been
fed with the bread I have tasted, made of the meal of the fruit,
as is said by Pliny to have been done in Lybia; and as the taste of
the bread is sweet and agreeable, it is not likely that the soldiers
would complain of it.

We arrived in the evening at the village of Toorda; when all the rest
of the king’s people turned back except two, who remained with me
as guides to Jarra.

Feb. 15th. I departed from Toorda, and about two o’clock came to
a considerable town called Funingkedy. As we approached the town the
inhabitants were much alarmed; for, as one of my guides wore a turban,
they mistook us for some Moorish banditti. This misapprehension was
soon cleared up, and we were well received by a Gambia Slatee, who
resides at this town, and at whose house we lodged.

[Illustration: _Rhamnus Lotus._

_M. Park delt._

_Mc.Kenzie sculpt._

_Published as the Act directs, by George Nicol Pall Mall, January
1.1799._]

Feb. 16th. We were informed that a number of people would go from this
town to Jarra on the day following; and as the road was much infested
by the Moors, we resolved to stay and accompany the travellers. In
the meantime we were told, that a few days before our arrival, most of
the Bushreens and people of property in Funingkedy had gone to Jarra,
to consult about removing their families and effects to that town,
for fear of the approaching war; and that the Moors, in their absence,
had stolen some of their cattle.

About two o’clock, as I was lying asleep upon a bullock’s hide
behind the door of the hut, I was awakened by the screams of women,
and a general clamour and confusion among the inhabitants. At first
I suspected that the Bambarrans had actually entered the town;
but observing my boy upon the top of one of the huts, I called to
him to know what was the matter. He informed me that the Moors were
come a second time to steal the cattle, and that they were now close
to the town. I mounted the roof of the hut, and observed a large
herd of bullocks coming towards the town, followed by five Moors on
horseback, who drove the cattle forward with their muskets. When they
had reached the wells, which are close to the town, the Moors selected
from the herd sixteen of the finest beasts, and drove them off at full
gallop. During this transaction, the townspeople, to the number of five
hundred, stood collected close to the walls of the town; and when the
Moors drove the cattle away, though they passed within pistol-shot
of them, the inhabitants scarcely made a shew of resistance. I only
saw four muskets fired, which, being loaded with gunpowder of the
Negroes’ own manufacture, did no execution. Shortly after this I
observed a number of people supporting a young man upon horseback, and
conducting him slowly towards the town. This was one of the herdsmen,
who, attempting to throw his spear, had been wounded by a shot from one
of the Moors. His mother walked on before, quite frantic with grief,
clapping her hands, and enumerating the good qualities of her son. _Ee
maffo fonio_, (he never told a lie) said the disconsolate mother, as
her wounded son was carried in at the gate—_Ee maffo fonio abada_
(he never told a lie; no, never.) When they had conveyed him to his
hut, and laid him upon a mat, all the spectators joined in lamenting
his fate, by screaming and howling in the most piteous manner.

After their grief had subsided a little, I was desired to examine
the wound. I found that the ball had passed quite through his leg,
having fractured both bones a little below the knee: the poor boy
was faint from the loss of blood, and his situation withal so very
precarious, that I could not console his relations with any great hopes
of his recovery. However, to give him a possible chance, I observed
to them that it was necessary to cut off his leg above the knee;
this proposal made every one start with horror: they had never heard
of such a method of cure, and would by no means give their consent
to it; indeed they evidently considered me as a sort of cannibal
for proposing so cruel and unheard of an operation, which in their
opinion would be attended with more pain and danger than the wound
itself. The patient was therefore committed to the care of some old
Bushreens, who endeavoured to secure him a passage into Paradise,
by whispering in his ear some Arabic sentences, and desiring him
to repeat them. After many unsuccessful attempts, the poor Heathen
at last pronounced, _la illah el allah, Mahamet rasowl allahi_,[10]
and the disciples of the Prophet assured his mother that her son had
given sufficient evidence of his faith, and would be happy in a future
state. He died the same evening.

Feb. 17th. My guides informed me, that in order to avoid the Moorish
banditti, it was necessary to travel in the night; we accordingly
departed from Funingkedy in the afternoon, accompanied by about thirty
people, carrying their effects with them into Ludamar, for fear of the
war. We travelled with great silence and expedition until midnight,
when we stopped in a sort of inclosure, near a small village; but the
thermometer being so low as 68°, none of the Negroes could sleep on
account of the cold.

At daybreak on the 18th, we resumed our journey, and at eight o’clock
passed _Simbing_, the frontier village of Ludamar, situated in a narrow
pass between two rocky hills, and surrounded with a high wall. From
this village Major Houghton (being deserted by his Negro servants, who
refused to follow him into the Moorish country) wrote his last letter
with a pencil to Dr. Laidley. This brave but unfortunate man, having
surmounted many difficulties, had taken a northerly direction, and
endeavoured to pass through the kingdom of Ludamar, where I afterwards
learned the following particulars concerning his melancholy fate. On
his arrival at Jarra, he got acquainted with certain Moorish merchants
who were travelling to Tisheet (a place near the salt pits in the great
Desert, ten days’ journey to the northward) to purchase salt; and
the Major, at the expence of a musket and some tobacco, engaged them
to convey him thither. It is impossible to form any other opinion on
this determination, than that the Moors intentionally deceived him,
either with regard to the route that he wished to pursue, or the
state of the intermediate country between Jarra and Tombuctoo. Their
intention probably was to rob and leave him in the Desert. At the end
of two days he suspected their treachery, and insisted on returning
to Jarra. Finding him persist in this determination, the Moors robbed
him of every thing he possessed, and went off with their camels;
the poor Major being thus deserted, returned on foot to a watering
place in possession of the Moors, called Tarra. He had been some
days without food, and the unfeeling Moors refusing to give him any,
he sunk at last under his distresses. Whether he actually perished
of hunger, or was murdered outright by the savage Mahomedans, is not
certainly known; his body was dragged into the woods, and I was shewn
at a distance, the spot where his remains were left to perish.

About four miles to the north of Simbing, we came to a small stream
of water, where we observed a number of wild horses: they were all
of one colour, and galloped away from us at an easy rate, frequently
stopping and looking back. The Negroes hunt them for food, and their
flesh is much esteemed.

About noon we arrived at Jarra, a large town situated at the bottom of
some rocky hills. But before I proceed to describe the place itself,
and relate the various occurrences which befel me there, it will not be
improper to give my readers a brief recital of the origin of the war
which induced me to take this route; an unfortunate determination,
the immediate cause of all the misfortunes and calamities which
afterward befel me. The recital which I propose to give in this place,
will prevent interruptions hereafter.

This war, which desolated Kaarta soon after I had left that kingdom,
and spread terror into many of the neighbouring states, arose in the
following manner. A few bullocks belonging to a frontier village of
Bambarra having been stolen by a party of Moors, were sold to the
Dooty, or chief man, of a town in Kaarta. The villagers claimed their
cattle, and being refused satisfaction, complained of the Dooty to
their sovereign, Mansong, King of Bambarra, who probably beheld with
an eye of jealousy the growing prosperity of Kaarta, and availed
himself of this incident to declare hostilities against that kingdom.

With this view he sent a messenger and a party of horsemen to Daisy
King of Kaarta, to inform him that the King of Bambarra, with nine
thousand men, would visit Kemmoo in the course of the dry season;
and to desire that he (Daisy) would direct his slaves to sweep the
houses, and have every thing ready for their accommodation. The
messenger concluded this insulting notification by presenting the
king with a pair of _iron sandals_; at the same time adding, that
“until such time as Daisy had worn out these sandals in his flight,
he should never be secure from the arrows of Bambarra.”

Daisy, having consulted with his chief men about the best means of
repelling so formidable an enemy, returned an answer of defiance, and
made a Bushreen write in Arabic, upon a piece of thin board, a sort
of proclamation, which was suspended to a tree in the public square;
and a number of aged men were sent to different places to explain it
to the common people. This proclamation called upon all the friends
of Daisy to join him immediately; but to such as had no arms, or were
afraid to enter into the war, permission was given to retire into
any of the neighbouring kingdoms; and it was added, that provided
they observed a strict neutrality, they should always be welcome to
return to their former habitations; if, however, they took any active
part against Kaarta, they had then “broken the key of their huts,
and could never afterwards enter the door.” Such was the expression.

This proclamation was very generally applauded: but many of the
Kaartans, and amongst others the powerful tribes of Jower and Kakaroo,
availing themselves of the indulgent clause, retired from Daisy’s
dominions, and took refuge in Ludamar and Kasson. By means of these
desertions, Daisy’s army was not so numerous as might have been
expected; and when I was at Kemmoo, the whole number of effective men,
according to report, did not exceed four thousand; but they were men
of spirit and enterprize, and could be depended on.

On the 22d of February (four days after my arrival at Jarra), Mansong,
with his army, advanced towards Kemmoo; and Daisy, without hazarding
a battle, retired to Joko, a town to the north-west of Kemmoo, where
he remained three days, and then took refuge in a strong town called
Gedingooma, situated in the hilly country, and surrounded with high
walls of stone. When Daisy departed from Joko, his sons refused to
follow him, alledging that “the singing-men would publish their
disgrace, as soon as it should be known that Daisy and his family had
fled from Joko without firing a gun.” They were therefore left behind
with a number of horsemen to defend Joko; but, after many skirmishes,
they were totally defeated, and one of Daisy’s sons taken prisoner;
the remainder fled to Gedingooma, which Daisy had stored with
provisions, and where he determined to make his final stand.

Mansong, finding that Daisy was determined to avoid a pitched battle,
placed a strong force at Joko to watch his motions, and separating the
remainder of his army into small detachments, ordered them to over-run
the country, and seize upon the inhabitants, before they had time to
escape. These orders were executed with such promptitude, that in a few
days the whole kingdom of Kaarta became a scene of desolation. Most
of the poor inhabitants of the different towns and villages, being
surprised in the night, fell an easy prey; and their corn, and every
thing which could be useful to Daisy, was burnt and destroyed. During
these transactions, Daisy was employed in fortifying Gedingooma:
this town is built in a narrow pass between two high hills, having
only two gates, one towards Kaarta, and the other towards Jaffnoo;
the gate towards Kaarta, was defended by Daisy in person; and that
towards Jaffnoo was committed to the charge of his sons. When the
army of Bambarra approached the town, they made some attempts to
storm it; but were always driven back with great loss; and Mansong,
finding Daisy more formidable than he expected, resolved to cut off
his supplies, and starve him into submission. He accordingly sent
all the prisoners he had taken, into Bambarra; and having collected
a considerable quantity of provisions, remained with his army two
whole months in the vicinity of Gedingooma, without doing any thing
decisive. During this time he was much harassed by sallies from the
besieged; and his stock of provisions being nearly exhausted, he
sent to Ali, the Moorish King of Ludamar, for two hundred horsemen,
to enable him to make an attack upon the north gate of the town,
and give the Bambarrans an opportunity of storming the place. Ali,
though he had made an agreement with Mansong at the commencement
of the war, to afford him assistance, now refused to fulfil his
engagement; which so enraged Mansong, that he marched part of his
army to Funingkedy, with a view to surprise the camp of Benowm;
but the Moors having received intelligence of his design, fled to
the northward; and Mansong, without attempting any thing farther,
returned to Sego. This happened while I was myself in captivity in
Ali’s camp, as will hereafter be seen.

As the King of Kaarta had now got quit of his most formidable
antagonist, it might have been hoped that peace would have been
restored to his dominions; but an extraordinary incident involved him,
immediately afterward, in hostilities with Kasson; the king of which
country dying about that time, the succession was disputed by his
two sons. The younger (Sambo Sego, my old acquaintance) prevailed;
and drove his brother from the country. He fled to Gedingooma; and
being pursued thither, Daisy, who had lived in constant friendship
with both the brothers, refused to deliver him up; at the same time
declaring that he would not support his claim, nor any way interfere in
the quarrel. Sambo Sego, elated with success, and proud of the homage
that was paid him as sovereign of Kasson, was much displeased with
Daisy’s conduct, and joined with some disaffected fugitive Kaartans
in a plundering expedition against him. Daisy, who little expected
such a visit, had sent a number of people to Joko, to plant corn, and
collect together such cattle as they might find straying in the woods,
in order to supply his army. All these people fell into the hands of
Sambo Sego, who carried them to Kooniakary, and afterwards sent them in
caravans, to be sold to the French at Fort Louis, on the river Senegal.

This attack was soon retaliated; for Daisy, who was now in distress
for want of provisions, thought he was justified in supplying himself
from the plunder of Kasson. He accordingly took with him eight hundred
of his best men, and marching secretly through the woods, surprised,
in the night, three large villages near Kooniakary, in which many of
his traitorous subjects, who were in Sambo’s expedition, had taken
up their residence; all these, and indeed all the able men that fell
into Daisy’s hands, were immediately put to death.

After this expedition, Daisy began to indulge the hopes of peace;
many of his discontented subjects had returned to their allegiance,
and were repairing the towns which had been desolated by the war;
the rainy season was approaching; and every thing wore a favourable
appearance, when he was suddenly attacked from a different quarter.

The Jowers, Kakaroos, and some other Kaartans, who had deserted from
him at the commencement of the war, and had shewn a decided preference
to Mansong and his army during the whole campaign, were now afraid
or ashamed to ask forgiveness of Daisy, and being very powerful in
themselves, joined together to make war upon him. They solicited the
Moors to assist them in their rebellion (as will appear hereafter)
and having collected a considerable army, they plundered a large
village belonging to Daisy, and carried off a number of prisoners.

Daisy immediately prepared to revenge this insult; but the Jowers,
and indeed almost all the Negro inhabitants of Ludamar, deserted
their towns and fled to the eastward; and the rainy season put an
end to the war of Kaarta, which had enriched a few individuals,
but destroyed the happiness of thousands.

Such was the state of affairs among the nations in the neighbourhood of
Jarra, soon after the period of my arrival there. I shall now proceed,
after giving some description of that place, with the detail of events
as they occurred.


[Footnote 10: There is but one god, and Mahomet is his Prophet.]




                              CHAPTER IX.                               

_Some Account of Jarra, and the Moorish Inhabitants. — The Author
applies for, and obtains Permission from Ali, the Moorish Chief or
Sovereign, of Ludamar, to pass through his Territories. — Departs
from Jarra, and arrives at Deena — ill treated by the Moors. —
Proceeds to Sampaka — finds a Negro who makes Gunpowder. —
Continues his Journey to Samee, where he is seized by some Moors who
are sent for that Purpose by Ali — is conveyed a Prisoner to the
Moorish Camp at Benowm, on the Borders of the Great Desert._


The town of Jarra is of considerable extent: the houses are built
of clay and stone intermixed; the clay answering the purpose of
mortar. It is situated in the Moorish kingdom of Ludamar; but the
major part of the inhabitants are Negroes, from the borders of the
southern states, who prefer a precarious protection under the Moors,
which they purchase by a tribute, rather than continue exposed to their
predatory hostilities. The tribute they pay is considerable; and they
manifest towards their Moorish superiors the most unlimited obedience
and submission, and are treated by them with the utmost indignity and
contempt. The Moors of this, and the other states adjoining the country
of the Negroes, resemble in their persons the Mulattoes of the West
Indies to so great a degree, as not easily to be distinguished from
them; and in truth, the present generation seem to be a mixed race
between the Moors (properly so called) of the North, and the Negroes
of the South; possessing many of the worst qualities of both nations.

Of the origin of these Moorish tribes, as distinguished from the
inhabitants of Barbary, from whom they are divided by the Great Desert,
nothing farther seems to be known than what is related by John Leo,
the African; whose account may be abridged as follows:

Before the Arabian Conquest, about the middle of the seventh century,
all the inhabitants of Africa, whether they were descended from
Numidians, Phœnicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, or Goths, were
comprehended under the general name of _Mauri_, or Moors. All these
nations were converted to the religion of Mahomet, during the Arabian
empire under the Kaliphs. About this time many of the Numidian tribes,
who led a wandering life in the Desert, and supported themselves
upon the produce of their cattle, retired southward across the Great
Desert, to avoid the fury of the Arabians; and by one of those tribes,
says Leo, (that of Zanhaga) were discovered and conquered the Negro
nations on the Niger. By the Niger, is here undoubtedly meant the
river of Senegal, which in the Mandingo language is called _Bafing_,
or the Black River.

To what extent these people are now spread over the African continent,
it is difficult to ascertain. There is reason to believe, that their
dominion stretches from West to East, in a narrow line or belt,
from the mouth of the Senegal (on the northern side of that river)
to the confines of Abyssinia. They are a subtle and treacherous race
of people; and take every opportunity of cheating and plundering the
credulous and unsuspecting Negroes. But their manners and general
habits of life will be best explained, as incidents occur in the
course of my narrative.

On my arrival at Jarra, I obtained a lodging at the house of Daman
Jumma, a Gambia Slatee. This man had formerly borrowed goods from
Dr. Laidley, who had given me an order for the money, to the amount of
six slaves; and though the debt was of five years standing, he readily
acknowledged it, and promised me what money he could raise. He was
afraid, he said, in his present situation, he could not pay more than
two slaves’ value. He gave me his assistance however in exchanging
my beads and amber for gold, which was a more portable article,
and more easily concealed from the Moors.

The difficulties we had already encountered, the unsettled state of the
country, and, above all, the savage and overbearing deportment of the
Moors, had so completely frightened my attendants, that they declared
they would rather relinquish every claim to reward, than proceed
one step farther to the eastward. Indeed the danger they incurred
of being seized by the Moors, and sold into slavery, became every
day more apparent; and I could not condemn their apprehensions. In
this situation, deserted by my attendants, and reflecting that my
retreat was cut off by the war behind me, and that a Moorish country
of ten days’ journey lay before me, I applied to Daman to obtain
permission from Ali, the chief or sovereign of Ludamar, that I might
pass through his country unmolested, into Bambarra; and I hired one of
Daman’s slaves to accompany me thither, as soon as such permission
should be obtained. A messenger was dispatched to Ali, who at this
time was encamped near Benowm; and as a present was necessary, in
order to insure success, I sent him five garments of cotton cloth,
which I purchased of Daman, for one of my fowling-pieces. Fourteen
days elapsed in settling this affair; but, on the evening of the
26th of February, one of Ali’s slaves arrived with directions,
as he pretended, to conduct me in safety, as far as Goomba; and
told me I was to pay him one garment of blue cotton cloth for his
attendance. My faithful boy observing that I was about to proceed
without him, resolved to accompany me; and told me, that though he
wished me to turn back, he never had entertained any serious thoughts
of deserting me, but had been advised to it by Johnson, with a view
to induce me to return immediately for Gambia.

Feb. 27th. I delivered most of my papers to Johnson, to convey them
to Gambia as soon as possible, reserving a duplicate for myself, in
case of accidents. I likewise left in Daman’s possession a bundle
of clothes, and other things that were not absolutely necessary;
for I wished to diminish my baggage as much as possible, that the
Moors might have fewer inducements to plunder us.

Things being thus adjusted, we departed from Jarra in the forenoon,
and slept at Troomgoomba, a small walled village, inhabited by a
mixture of Negroes and Moors. On the day following (Feb. 28th) we
reached Quira; and on the 29th, after a toilsome journey over a sandy
country, we came to Compe, a watering place belonging to the Moors;
from whence on the morning following, we proceeded to Deena, a large
town, and, like Jarra, built of stone and clay. The Moors are here
in greater proportion to the Negroes than at Jarra. They assembled
round the hut of the Negro where I lodged, and treated me with the
greatest insolence: they hissed, shouted, and abused me; they even
spit in my face, with a view to irritate me, and afford them a pretext
for seizing my baggage. But, finding such insults had not the desired
effect, they had recourse to the final and decisive argument, that I
was a Christian, and of course that my property was lawful plunder
to the followers of Mahomet. They accordingly opened my bundles,
and robbed me of every thing they fancied. My attendants finding that
every body could rob me with impunity, insisted on returning to Jarra.

The day following (March 2d) I endeavoured, by all the means in my
power, to prevail upon my people to go on; but they still continued
obstinate; and having reason to fear some further insult from the
fanatic Moors, I resolved to proceed alone. Accordingly the next
morning, about two o’clock I departed from Deena. It was moonlight;
but the roaring of the wild beasts made it necessary to proceed
with caution.

When I had reached a piece of rising ground about half a mile from
the town, I heard somebody halloo, and looking back, saw my faithful
boy running after me. He informed me, that Ali’s man had gone
back to Benowm, and that Daman’s Negro was about to depart for
Jarra; but he said he had no doubt, if I would stop a little, that
he could persuade the latter to accompany us. I waited accordingly,
and in about an hour the boy returned with the Negro; and we continued
travelling over a sandy country, covered with _asclepias gigantica_,
until mid-day, when we came to a number of deserted huts; and seeing
some appearances of water at a little distance, I sent the boy to
fill a soofroo; but as he was examining the place for water, the
roaring of a lion, that was probably on the same pursuit, induced the
frightened boy to return in haste, and we submitted patiently to the
disappointment. In the afternoon we reached a town inhabited chiefly
by Foulahs, called Samaming-koos.

Next morning (March 4th) we set out for Sampaka; which place we reached
about two o’clock. On the road we observed immense quantities of
locusts: the trees were quite black with them. These insects devour
every vegetable that comes in their way, and in a short time completely
strip a tree of its leaves. The noise of their excrement falling
upon the leaves and withered grass, very much resembles a shower
of rain. When a tree is shaken or struck, it is astonishing to see
what a cloud of them will fly off. In their flight they yield to the
current of the wind, which at this season of the year is always from
the N.E. Should the wind shift, it is difficult to conceive where
they could collect food, as the whole of their course was marked
with desolation.

Sampaka is a large town, and when the Moors and Bambarrans were at
war, was thrice attacked by the former; but they were driven off with
great loss, though the King of Bambarra was afterwards obliged to
give up this, and all the other towns as far as Goomba, in order to
obtain a peace. Here I lodged at the house of a Negro who practised
the art of making gunpowder. He shewed me a bag of nitre, very white,
but the crystals were much smaller than common. They procure it in
considerable quantities from the ponds which are filled in the rainy
season, and to which the cattle resort for coolness during the heat
of the day. When the water is evaporated, a white efflorescence is
observed on the mud, which the natives collect and purify in such a
manner as to answer their purpose. The Moors supply them with sulphur
from the Mediterranean; and the process is completed by pounding the
different articles together in a wooden mortar. The grains are very
unequal, and the sound of its explosion is by no means so sharp as
that produced by European gunpowder.

March 5th. We departed from Sampaka at daylight. About noon we stopped
a little at a village called Dangali; and in the evening arrived at
Dalli. We saw upon the road two large herds of camels feeding. When the
Moors turn their camels to feed, they tie up one of their fore legs,
to prevent their straying. This happened to be a feast day at Dalli,
and the people were dancing before the Dooti’s house. But when they
were informed that a white man was come into the town, they left off
dancing, and came to the place where I lodged, walking in regular
order, two and two, with the music before them. They play upon a sort
of flute; but instead of blowing into a hole in the side, they blow
obliquely over the end, which is half shut by a thin piece of wood:
they govern the holes on the side with their fingers, and play some
simple and very plaintive airs. They continued to dance and sing until
midnight: during which time I was surrounded by so great a crowd, as
made it necessary for me to satisfy their curiosity, by sitting still.

March 6th. We stopt here this morning, because some of the townspeople,
who were going for Goomba on the day following, wished to accompany
us; but in order to avoid the crowd of people which usually assembled
in the evening, we went to a Negro village to the east of Dalli,
called Samee, where we were kindly received by the hospitable Dooti,
who on this occasion killed two fine sheep, and invited his friends
to come and feast with him.

March 7th. Our landlord was so proud of the honour of entertaining
a white man, that he insisted on my staying with him and his friends
until the cool of the evening, when he said he would conduct me to the
next village. As I was now within two days’ journey of Goomba, I had
no apprehensions from the Moors, and readily accepted the invitation. I
spent the forenoon very pleasantly with these poor Negroes: their
company was the more acceptable, as the gentleness of their manners
presented a striking contrast to the rudeness and barbarity of the
Moors. They enlivened their conversation by drinking a fermented
liquor made from corn; the same sort of beer that I have described
in a former chapter; and better I never tasted in Great Britain.

In the midst of this harmless festivity, I flattered myself that
all danger from the Moors was over. Fancy had already placed me on
the banks of the Niger, and presented to my imagination a thousand
delightful scenes in my future progress, when a party of Moors
unexpectedly entered the hut, and dispelled the golden dream. They
came, they said, by Ali’s orders, to convey me to his camp at
Benowm. If I went peaceably, they told me, I had nothing to fear;
but if I refused, they had orders to bring me by force. I was struck
dumb by surprise and terror, which the Moors observing, endeavoured to
calm my apprehensions, by repeating the assurance that I had nothing
to fear. Their visit, they added, was occasioned by the curiosity
of Ali’s wife, _Fatima_, who had heard so much about Christians,
that she was very anxious to see one: as soon as her curiosity should
be satisfied, they had no doubt, they said, that Ali would give me a
handsome present, and send a person to conduct me to Bambarra. Finding
entreaty and resistance equally fruitless, I prepared to follow the
messengers, and took leave of my landlord and his company with great
reluctance. Accompanied by my faithful boy (for Daman’s slave made
his escape on seeing the Moors), we reached Dalli in the evening;
where we were strictly watched by the Moors during the night.

March 8th. We were conducted by a circuitous path through the woods
to Dangali, where we slept.

March 9th. We continued our journey, and in the afternoon arrived at
Sampaka. On the road we saw a party of Moors, well armed, who told
us that they were hunting for a runaway slave; but the townspeople
informed us, that a party of Moors had attempted to steal some cattle
from the town in the morning, but were repulsed; and, on their
describing the persons, we were satisfied that they were the same
banditti that we had seen in the woods.

Next morning (March 10th) we set out for Samaning Koos. On the road
we overtook a woman and two boys, with an ass: she informed us that
she was going for Bambarra, but had been stopped on the road by a
party of Moors, who had taken most of her clothes, and some gold
from her; and that she would be under the necessity of returning to
Deena till the fast moon was over. The same evening the new moon was
seen, which ushered in the month Rhamadan. Large fires were made in
different parts of the town, and a greater quantity of victuals than
usual dressed upon the occasion.

March 11th. By daylight the Moors were in readiness; but as I had
suffered much from thirst on the road, I made my boy fill a soofroo
of water for my own use; for the Moors assured me that they should
not taste either meat or drink until sunset. However, I found that
the excessive heat of the sun, and the dust we raised in travelling,
overcame their scruples, and made my soofroo a very useful part of our
baggage. On our arrival at Deena, I went to pay my respects to one of
Ali’s sons. I found him sitting in a low hut, with five or six more
of his companions, washing their hands and feet, and frequently taking
water into their mouths, gargling, and spitting it out again. I was
no sooner seated, than he handed me a double-barreled gun, and told
me to dye the stock of a blue colour, and repair one of the locks. I
found great difficulty in persuading him that I knew nothing about the
matter. However, says he, if you cannot repair the gun, you shall give
me some knives and scissars immediately; and when my boy, who acted
as interpreter, assured him that I had no such articles, he hastily
snatched up a musket that stood by him, cocked it, and putting the
muzzle close to the boy’s ear, would certainly have shot him dead
upon the spot, had not the Moors wrested the musket from him, and made
signs for us to retreat. The boy, being terrified at this treatment,
attempted to make his escape in the night; but was prevented by the
vigilance of the Moors, who guarded us with strict attention; and at
night always went to sleep by the door of the hut, in such a situation
that it was almost impossible to pass, without stepping upon them.

March 12. We departed from Deena towards Benowm, and about nine
o’clock came to a Korree, whence the Moors were preparing to depart
to the southward, on account of the scarcity of water; here we filled
our soofroo, and continued our journey over a hot sandy country,
covered with small stunted shrubs, until about one o’clock, when
the heat of the sun obliged us to stop. But our water being expended,
we could not prudently remain longer than a few minutes to collect a
little gum, which is an excellent succedaneum for water; as it keeps
the mouth moist, and allays, for a time, the pain in the throat.

About five o’clock we came in sight of Benowm, the residence of
Ali. It presented to the eye a great number of dirty looking tents,
scattered, without order, over a large space of ground; and among the
tents appeared large herds of camels, cattle, and goats. We reached
the skirts of this camp, a little before sunset, and, with much
entreaty, procured a little water. My arrival was no sooner observed,
than the people who drew water at the wells threw down their buckets;
those in the tents mounted their horses; and men, women, and children,
came running or galloping towards me. I soon found myself surrounded
by such a crowd, that I could scarcely move; one pulled my clothes,
another took off my hat, a third stopped me to examine my waistcoat
buttons, and a fourth called out, _la illa el allah Mahamet rasowl
allahi_,[11] and signified, in a threatening manner, that I must repeat
those words. We reached at length the king’s tent, where we found
a great number of people, men and women, assembled. Ali was sitting
upon a black leather cushion, clipping a few hairs from his upper lip;
a female attendant holding up a looking glass before him. He appeared
to be an old man, of the Arab cast, with a long white beard; and he
had a sullen and indignant aspect. He surveyed me with attention,
and inquired of the Moors if I could speak Arabic: being answered in
the negative, he appeared much surprised, and continued silent. The
surrounding attendants, and especially the ladies, were abundantly
more inquisitive: they asked a thousand questions; inspected every
part of my apparel, searched my pockets, and obliged me to unbutton my
waistcoat, and display the whiteness of my skin: they even counted my
toes and fingers, as if they doubted whether I was in truth a human
being. In a little time the priest announced evening prayers; but
before the people departed, the Moor who had acted as interpreter,
informed me that Ali was about to present me with something to eat;
and looking round, I observed some boys bringing a wild hog, which
they tied to one of the tent strings, and Ali made signs to me to kill
and dress it for supper. Though I was very hungry, I did not think it
prudent to eat any part of an animal so much detested by the Moors,
and therefore told him that I never eat such food. They then untied
the hog, in hopes that it would run immediately at me; for they believe
that a great enmity subsists between hogs and Christians; but in this
they were disappointed; for the animal no sooner regained his liberty,
than he began to attack indiscriminately every person that came in his
way, and at last took shelter under the couch upon which the King was
sitting. The assembly being thus dissolved, I was conducted to the tent
of Ali’s chief slave, but was not permitted to enter, nor allowed
to touch any thing belonging to it. I requested something to eat,
and a little boiled corn, with salt and water, was at length sent me
in a wooden bowl; and a mat was spread upon the sand before the tent,
on which I passed the night, surrounded by the curious multitude.

[Illustration: _J. C. Barrow delt. from a Sketch from M. Park._

_J. Mills sculpt._

_A VIEW of ALI’S TENT at the CAMP of BENOWM._

_Published as the Act directs, by George Nicol, Pall Mall, January
the 1st.1799._]

At sunrise, Ali, with a few attendants, came on horseback to visit
me, and signified that he had provided a hut for me, where I would be
sheltered from the sun. I was accordingly conducted thither, and found
the hut comparatively cool and pleasant. It was constructed of corn
stalks set up on end, in the form of a square, with a flat roof of the
same materials, supported by forked sticks; to one of which was tied
the wild hog before mentioned. This animal had certainly been placed
there by Ali’s order, out of derision to a Christian; and I found
it a very disagreeable inmate, as it drew together a number of boys,
who amused themselves by beating it with sticks, until they had so
irritated the hog that it ran and bit at every person within its reach.

I was no sooner seated in this my new habitation, than the Moors
assembled in crowds to behold me; but I found it rather a troublesome
levee, for I was obliged to take off one of my stockings, and show
them my foot, and even to take off my jacket and waistcoat, to show
them how my clothes were put on and off; they were much delighted with
the curious contrivance of buttons. All this was to be repeated to
every succeeding visitor; for such as had already seen these wonders,
insisted on their friends seeing the same; and in this manner I
was employed, dressing and undressing, buttoning and unbuttoning,
from noon to night. About eight o’clock, Ali sent me for supper,
some kouskous and salt and water, which was very acceptable, being
the only victuals I had tasted since morning.

I observed that, in the night, the Moors kept regular watch, and
frequently looked into the hut, to see if I was asleep, and if it was
quite dark, they would light a wisp of grass. About two o’clock in
the morning, a Moor entered the hut, probably with a view to steal
something, or perhaps to murder me; and groping about, he laid his
hand upon my shoulder. As night visitors were at best but suspicious
characters, I sprang up the moment he laid his hand upon me; and
the Moor, in his haste to get off, stumbled over my boy, and fell
with his face upon the wild hog, which returned the attack by biting
the Moor’s arm. The screams of this man alarmed the people in the
King’s tent, who immediately conjectured that I had made my escape,
and a number of them mounted their horses, and prepared to pursue
me. I observed upon this occasion that Ali did not sleep in his own
tent, but came galloping upon a white horse from a small tent at a
considerable distance; indeed, the tyrannical and cruel behaviour of
this man made him so jealous of every person around him, that even
his own slaves and domestics knew not where he slept. When the Moors
had explained to him the cause of this outcry, they all went away,
and I was permitted to sleep quietly until morning.

March 13th. With the returning day commenced the same round of insult
and irritation: the boys assembled to beat the hog, and the men and
women to plague the Christian. It is impossible for me to describe the
behaviour of a people who study mischief as a science, and exult in the
miseries and misfortunes of their fellow-creatures. It is sufficient to
observe, that the rudeness, ferocity, and fanaticism, which distinguish
the Moors from the rest of mankind, found here a proper subject
whereon to exercise their propensities. I was a _stranger_, I was
_unprotected_, and I was a _Christian_; each of these circumstances is
sufficient to drive every spark of humanity from the heart of a Moor;
but when all of them, as in my case, were combined in the same person,
and a suspicion prevailed withal, that I had come as a _spy_ into the
country, the reader will easily imagine that, in such a situation,
I had every thing to fear. Anxious, however, to conciliate favour,
and, if possible, to afford the Moors no pretence for ill treating
me, I readily complied with every command, and patiently bore every
insult; but never did any period of my life pass away so heavily:
from sunrise to sunset, was I obliged to suffer, with an unruffled
countenance, the insults of the rudest savages on earth.


[Footnote 11: See page 103.]




                               CHAPTER X.                               

_Various Occurrences during the Author’s Confinement at Benowm —
is visited by some Moorish Ladies. — A Funeral and Wedding. — The
Author receives an extraordinary Present from the Bride. — Other
Circumstances illustrative of the Moorish Character and Manners._


The Moors, though very indolent themselves, are rigid taskmasters,
and keep every person under them in full employment. My boy Demba was
sent to the woods to collect withered grass for Ali’s horses; and
after a variety of projects concerning myself, they at last found out
an employment for me: this was no other than the respectable office
of _barber_. I was to make my first exhibition in this capacity in
the royal presence, and to be honoured with the task of shaving the
head of the young prince of Ludamar. I accordingly seated myself
upon the sand, and the boy, with some hesitation, sat down beside
me. A small razor, about three inches long, was put into my hand,
and I was ordered to proceed; but whether from my own want of skill,
or the improper shape of the instrument, I unfortunately made a
slight incision in the boy’s head, at the very commencement of the
operation; and the King observing the awkward manner in which I held
the razor, concluded that his son’s head was in very improper hands,
and ordered me to resign the razor, and walk out of the tent. This I
considered as a very fortunate circumstance; for I had laid it down
as a rule, to make myself as useless and insignificant as possible,
as the only means of recovering my liberty.

March 18. Four Moors arrived from Jarra with Johnson my interpreter,
having seized him before he had received any intimation of my
confinement; and bringing with them a bundle of clothes that I had
left at Daman Jumma’s house, for my use in case I should return
by the way of Jarra. Johnson was led into Ali’s tent and examined;
the bundle was opened, and I was sent for, to explain the use of the
different articles. I was happy, however, to find that Johnson had
committed my papers to the charge of one of Daman’s wives. When I
had satisfied Ali’s curiosity respecting the different articles of
apparel, the bundle was again tied up, and put into a large cow-skin
bag, that stood in a corner of the tent. The same evening Ali sent
three of his people to inform me, that there were many thieves in the
neighbourhood, and that to prevent the rest of my things from being
stolen, it was necessary to convey them all into his tent. My clothes,
instruments, and every thing that belonged to me, were accordingly
carried away; and though the heat and dust made clean linen very
necessary and refreshing, I could not procure a single shirt out
of the small stock I had brought along with me. Ali was however
disappointed, by not finding among my effects the quantity of gold
and amber that he expected; but to make sure of every thing, he sent
the same people, on the morning following, to examine whether I had
any thing concealed about my person. They, with their usual rudeness,
searched every part of my apparel, and stripped me of all my gold,
amber, my watch, and one of my pocket compasses; I had fortunately,
in the night, buried the other compass in the sand; and this, with
the clothes I had on, was all that the tyranny of Ali had now left me.

The gold and amber were highly gratifying to Moorish avarice, but the
pocket compass soon became an object of superstitious curiosity. Ali
was very desirous to be informed, why that small piece of iron,
the needle, always pointed to the Great Desert; and I found myself
somewhat puzzled to answer the question. To have pleaded my ignorance,
would have created a suspicion that I wished to conceal the real truth
from him; I therefore told him, that my mother resided far beyond the
sands of Zaharra, and that whilst she was alive the piece of iron
would always point that way, and serve as a guide to conduct me to
her, and that if she was dead it would point to her grave. Ali now
looked at the compass with redoubled amazement; turned it round and
round repeatedly; but observing that it always pointed the same way,
he took it up with great caution and returned it to me, manifesting
that he thought there was something of magic in it, and that he was
afraid of keeping so dangerous an instrument in his possession.

March 20th. This morning a council of chief men was held in Ali’s
tent respecting me: their decisions, though they were all unfavourable
to me, were differently related by different persons. Some said that
they intended to put me to death; others that I was only to lose my
right hand; but the most probable account was that which I received
from Ali’s own son, a boy about nine years of age, who came to
me in the evening, and, with much concern, informed me that his
uncle had persuaded his father to put out my eyes, which they said
resembled those of a cat, and that all the Bushreens had approved of
this measure. His father however, he said, would not put the sentence
into execution until Fatima the queen, who was at present in the north,
had seen me.

March 21st. Anxious to know my destiny, I went to the king early in
the morning; and as a number of Bushreens were assembled, I thought
this a favourable opportunity of discovering their intentions. I
therefore began by begging his permission to return to Jarra; which
was flatly refused: his wife, he said, had not yet seen me, and I must
stay until she came to Benowm, after which I should be at liberty
to depart; and that my horse, which had been taken away from me the
day after I arrived, should be again restored to me. Unsatisfactory
as this answer was, I was forced to appear pleased; and as there
was little hopes of making my escape, at this season of the year,
on account of the excessive heat, and the total want of water in the
woods, I resolved to wait patiently until the rains had set in, or
until some more favourable opportunity should present itself;—but
_hope deferred maketh the heart sick_. This tedious procrastination
from day to day, and the thoughts of travelling through the Negro
kingdoms in the rainy season, which was now fast approaching, made
me very melancholy; and having passed a restless night, I found
myself attacked, in the morning, by a smart fever. I had wrapped
myself close up in my cloak, with a view to induce perspiration,
and was asleep when a party of Moors entered the hut, and with their
usual rudeness pulled the cloak from me. I made signs to them that
I was sick, and wished much to sleep; but I solicited in vain:
my distress was matter of sport to them, and they endeavoured
to heighten it, by every means in their power. This studied and
degrading insolence, to which I was constantly exposed, was one of
the bitterest ingredients in the cup of captivity; and often made
life itself a burthen to me. In those distressing moments I have
frequently envied the situation of the slave; who, amidst all his
calamities, could still possess the enjoyment of his own thoughts;
a happiness to which I had, for some time, been a stranger. Wearied
out with such continual insults, and perhaps a little peevish from
the fever, I trembled lest my passion might unawares overleap the
bounds of prudence, and spur me to some sudden act of resentment,
when death must be the inevitable consequence. In this perplexity,
I left my hut, and walked to some shady trees at a little distance
from the camp, where I lay down. But even here, persecution followed
me; and solitude was thought too great an indulgence for a distressed
Christian. Ali’s son, with a number of horsemen, came galloping to
the place, and ordered me to rise and follow them. I begged they would
allow me to remain where I was, if it was only for a few hours; but
they paid little attention to what I said; and after a few threatening
words, one of them pulled out a pistol from a leather bag, that was
fastened to the pummel of his saddle, and presenting it towards me,
snapped it twice. He did this with so much indifference, that I really
doubted whether the pistol was loaded; he cocked it a third time, and
was striking the flint with a piece of steel, when I begged them to
desist, and returned with them to the camp. When we entered Ali’s
tent, we found him much out of humour. He called for the Moor’s
pistol, and amused himself for some time with opening and shutting
the pan; at length, taking up his powder horn, he fresh primed it;
and turning round to me with a menacing look, said something in
Arabic, which I did not understand. I desired my boy, who was sitting
before the tent, to inquire what offence I had committed; when I was
informed that having gone out of the camp without Ali’s permission,
they suspected that I had some design of making my escape; and that,
in future, if I was seen without the skirts of the camp, orders had
been given that I should be shot by the first person that observed me.

In the afternoon the horizon, to the eastward, was thick and hazy,
and the Moors prognosticated a sand wind; which accordingly commenced
on the morning following, and lasted, with slight intermissions,
for two days. The force of the wind was not in itself very great: it
was what a seaman would have denominated a _stiff breeze_; but the
quantity of sand and dust carried before it, was such as to darken
the whole atmosphere. It swept along from east to west, in a thick
and constant stream, and the air was at times so dark and full of
sand, that it was difficult to discern the neighbouring tents. As the
Moors always dress their victuals in the open air, this sand fell in
great plenty amongst the kouskous: it readily adhered to the skin,
when moistened by perspiration, and formed a cheap and universal hair
powder. The Moors wrap a cloth round their face, to prevent them from
inhaling the sand, and always turn their backs to the wind when they
look up, to prevent the sand falling into their eyes.

About this time, all the women of the camp had their feet, and the
ends of their fingers, stained of a dark saffron colour. I could
never ascertain whether this was done from motives of religion, or
by way of ornament. The curiosity of the Moorish ladies had been very
troublesome to me ever since my arrival at Benowm; and on the evening
of the 25th (whether from the instigation of others, or impelled by
their own ungovernable curiosity, or merely out of frolic, I cannot
affirm) a party of them came into my hut, and gave me plainly to
understand that the object of their visit was to ascertain, by actual
inspection, whether the rite of circumcision extended to the Nazarenes,
(Christians,) as well as to the followers of Mahomet. The reader will
easily judge of my surprise at this unexpected declaration; and in
order to avoid the proposed scrutiny, I thought it best to treat the
business jocularly. I observed to them, that it was not customary
in my country to give ocular demonstration in such cases, before so
many beautiful women; but that if all of them would retire, except the
young lady to whom I pointed, (selecting the youngest and handsomest),
I would satisfy her curiosity. The ladies enjoyed the jest; and
went away laughing heartily; and the young damsel herself to whom I
had given the preference, (though she did not avail herself of the
privilege of inspection), seemed no way displeased at the compliment;
for she soon afterwards sent me some meal and milk for my supper.

March 28th. This morning a large herd of cattle arrived from the
eastward; and one of the drivers, to whom Ali had lent my horse,
came into my hut with the leg of an antelope as a present, and told
me that my horse was standing before Ali’s tent. In a little time
Ali sent one of his slaves to inform me, that, in the afternoon,
I must be in readiness to ride out with him, as he intended to shew
me to some of his women.

About four o’clock, Ali, with six of his courtiers, came riding
to my hut, and told me to follow them. I readily complied. But here
a new difficulty occurred: the Moors, accustomed to a loose and easy
dress, could not reconcile themselves to the appearance of my _nankeen
breeches_, which they said were not only inelegant, but, on account
of their tightness, very indecent; and as this was a visit to ladies,
Ali ordered my boy to bring out the loose cloak which I had always
worn since my arrival at Benowm, and told me to wrap it close round
me. We visited the tents of four different ladies, at every one
of which I was presented with a bowl of milk and water. All these
ladies were remarkably corpulent, which is considered here as the
highest mark of beauty. They were very inquisitive, and examined my
hair and skin with great attention; but affected to consider me as
a sort of inferior being to themselves, and would knit their brows,
and seem to shudder, when they looked at the whiteness of my skin. In
the course of this evening’s excursion, my dress and appearance
afforded infinite mirth to the company, who galloped round me as if
they were baiting a wild animal; twirling their muskets round their
heads, and exhibiting various feats of activity and horsemanship,
seemingly to display their superior prowess over a miserable captive.

The Moors are certainly very good horsemen. They ride without fear;
their saddles, being high before and behind, afford them a very secure
seat; and if they chance to fall, the whole country is so soft and
sandy, that they are very seldom hurt. Their greatest pride, and one
of their principal amusements, is to put the horse to his full speed,
and then stop him with a sudden jerk, so as frequently to bring him
down upon his haunches. Ali always rode upon a milk-white horse,
with its tail dyed red. He never walked, unless when he went to say
his prayers; and even in the night, two or three horses were always
kept ready saddled, at a little distance from his own tent. The Moors
set a very high value upon their horses; for it is by their superior
fleetness that they are enabled to make so many predatory excursions
into the Negro countries. They feed them three or four times a day,
and generally give them a large quantity of sweet milk in the evening,
which the horses appear to relish very much.

April 3d. This forenoon a child, which had been some time sickly, died
in the next tent; and the mother and relations immediately began the
death howl. They were joined by a number of female visitors, who came
on purpose to assist at this melancholy concert. I had no opportunity
of seeing the burial, which is generally performed secretly, in the
dusk of the evening, and frequently at only a few yards distance
from the tent. Over the grave, they plant one particular shrub;
and no stranger is allowed to pluck a leaf, or even to touch it;
so great a veneration have they for the dead.

April 7th. About four o’clock in the afternoon, a whirlwind passed
through the camp, with such violence that it overturned three tents,
and blew down one side of my hut. These whirlwinds come from the
Great Desert, and, at this season of the year, are so common, that I
have seen five or six of them at one time. They carry up quantities
of sand to an amazing height, which resemble, at a distance, so many
moving pillars of smoke.

The scorching heat of the sun, upon a dry and sandy country, makes
the air insufferably hot. Ali having robbed me of my thermometer,
I had no means of forming a comparative judgment; but in the middle
of the day, when the beams of the vertical sun are seconded by the
scorching wind from the Desert, the ground is frequently heated to such
a degree, as not to be borne by the naked foot; even the Negro slaves,
will not run from one tent to another, without their sandals. At this
time of the day, the Moors lie stretched at length in their tents,
either asleep, or unwilling to move; and I have often felt the wind
so hot, that I could not hold my hand in the current of air which
came through the crevices of my hut, without feeling sensible pain.

April 8th. This day the wind blew from the south-west, and in the
night there was a heavy shower of rain, accompanied with thunder
and lightning.

April 10th. In the evening the Tabala, or large drum, was beat,
to announce a wedding, which was held at one of the neighbouring
tents. A great number of people of both sexes assembled, but without
that mirth and hilarity which take place at a Negro wedding: here there
was neither singing, nor dancing; nor any other amusement that I could
perceive. A woman was beating the drum, and the other women joining at
times, like a chorus, by setting up a shrill scream; and at the same
time, moving their tongues from one side of the mouth to the other,
with great celerity. I was soon tired, and had returned into my hut,
where I was sitting almost asleep, when an old woman entered, with
a wooden bowl in her hand, and signified that she had brought me
a present from the bride. Before I could recover from the surprise
which this message created, the woman discharged the contents of the
bowl full in my face. Finding that it was the same sort of holy water,
with which, among the Hottentots, a priest is said to sprinkle a new
married couple, I began to suspect that the old lady was actuated by
mischief, or malice; but she gave me seriously to understand, that it
was a nuptial benediction from the bride’s own person; and which,
on such occasions, is always received by the young unmarried Moors
as a mark of distinguished favour. This being the case, I wiped my
face, and sent my acknowledgments to the lady. The wedding drum
continued to beat, and the women to sing, or rather whistle, all
night. About nine in the morning, the bride was brought in state from
her mother’s tent, attended by a number of women, who carried her
tent, (a present from the husband) some bearing up the poles, others
holding by the strings; and in this manner they marched, whistling as
formerly, until they came to the place appointed for her residence,
where they pitched the tent. The husband followed, with a number
of men leading four bullocks, which they tied to the tent strings;
and having killed another, and distributed the beef among the people,
the ceremony was concluded.




                              CHAPTER XI.                               

_Occurrences at the Camp continued. — Information collected by
the Author, concerning Houssa and Tombuctoo; and the Situation of
the latter. — The Route described from Morocco to Benowm. — The
Author’s Distress from Hunger. — Ali removes his Camp to the
Northward. — The Author is carried Prisoner to the new Encampment,
and is presented to Queen Fatima. — Great Distress from the Want
of Water._


One whole month had now elapsed since I was led into captivity; during
which time, each returning day brought me fresh distresses. I watched
the lingering course of the sun with anxiety, and blessed his evening
beams as they shed a yellow lustre along the sandy floor of my hut;
for it was then that my oppressors left me, and allowed me to pass
the sultry night in solitude and reflection.

About midnight, a bowl of kouskous with some salt and water was brought
for me and my two attendants; this was our common fare, and it was
all that was allowed us, to allay the cravings of hunger, and support
nature for the whole of the following day: for it is to be observed,
that this was the Mahomedan Lent; and as the Moors keep the fast with
a religious strictness, they thought it proper to compel me, though a
Christian, to a similar observance. Time, however, somewhat reconciled
me to my situation: I found that I could bear hunger and thirst better
than I expected; and at length, I endeavoured to beguile the tedious
hours, by learning to write Arabic. The people who came to see me,
soon made me acquainted with the characters; and I discovered, that
by engaging their attention in this way, they were not so troublesome
as otherwise they would have been: indeed, when I observed any person
whose countenance I thought bore malice towards me, I made it a rule
to ask him, either to write in the sand himself, or to decipher what I
had already written; and the pride of shewing his superior attainments,
generally induced him to comply with my request.

April 14th. As Queen Fatima had not yet arrived, Ali proposed to go
to the north, and bring her back with him; but as the place was two
days’ journey from Benowm, it was necessary to have some refreshment
on the road; and Ali, suspicious of those about him, was so afraid of
being poisoned, that he never eat any thing but what was dressed under
his own immediate inspection. A fine bullock was therefore killed,
and the flesh being cut up into thin slices, was dried in the sun; and
this, with two bags of dry kouskous, formed his travelling provisions.

Previous to his departure, the black people of the town of Benowm
came, according to their annual custom, to shew their arms, and
bring their stipulated tribute of corn and cloth. They were but badly
armed; twenty-two with muskets, forty or fifty with bows and arrows;
and nearly the same number of men and boys, with spears only: they
arranged themselves before the tent, where they waited until their
arms were examined, and some little disputes settled.

About midnight on the 16th, Ali departed quietly from Benowm,
accompanied by a few attendants. He was expected to return in the
course of nine or ten days.

April 18th. Two days after the departure of Ali, a Shereef arrived
with salt, and some other articles, from Walet, the capital of
the kingdom of Biroo. As there was no tent appropriated for him,
he took up his abode in the same hut with me. He seemed to be a well
informed man, and his acquaintance both with the Arabic and Bambarra
tongues, enabled him to travel, with ease and safety, through a
number of kingdoms; for though his place of residence was Walet, he
had visited Houssa, and had lived some years at Tombuctoo. Upon my
inquiring so particularly about the distance, from Walet to Tombuctoo,
he asked me if I intended to travel that way; and being answered in
the affirmative, he shook his head, and said, _it would not do_; for
that Christians were looked upon there as the devil’s children, and
enemies to the Prophet. From him I learned the following particulars;
that Houssa was the largest town he had ever seen: that Walet was
larger than Tombuctoo; but being remote from the Niger, and its
trade consisting chiefly of salt, it was not so much resorted to by
strangers: that between Benowm and Walet was ten days’ journey; but
the road did not lead through any remarkable towns, and travellers
supported themselves by purchasing milk from the Arabs, who keep
their herds by the watering-places: two of the days’ journies,
was over a sandy country, without water. From Walet to Tombuctoo,
was eleven days more; but water was more plentiful, and the journey
was usually performed upon bullocks. He said there were many Jews at
Tombuctoo, but they all spoke Arabic, and used the same prayers as
the Moors. He frequently pointed his hand to the south-east quarter,
or rather the east by south; observing, that Tombuctoo was situated
in that direction; and though I made him repeat this information,
again and again, I never found him to vary more than half a point,
which was to the southward.

April 24th. This morning Shereef Sidi Mahomed Moora Abdalla, a
native of Morocco, arrived with five bullocks loaded with salt. He
had formerly resided some months at Gibraltar, where he had picked
up as much English, as enabled him to make himself understood. He
informed me, that he had been five months in coming from Santa Cruz;
but that great part of the time had been spent in trading. When
I requested him to enumerate the days employed in travelling from
Morocco to Benowm, he gave them as follows:—to Swera, three days;
to Agadier, three; to Jiniken, ten; to Wadenoon, four; to Lakeneig,
five; to Zeeriwin-zeriman, five; to Tisheet, ten; to Benowm, ten; in
all fifty days: but travellers usually rest a long while at Jiniken
and Tisheet; at the latter of which places they dig the rock salt,
which is so great an article of commerce with the Negroes.

In conversing with these Shereefs, and the different strangers that
resorted to the camp, I passed my time with rather less uneasiness
than formerly. On the other hand, as the dressing of my victuals was
now left entirely to the care of Ali’s slaves, over whom I had not
the smallest control, I found myself but ill supplied, worse even than
in the fast month: for two successive nights, they neglected to send us
our accustomed meal, and though my boy went to a small Negro town near
the camp, and begged with great diligence from hut to hut, he could
only procure a few handfuls of ground nuts, which he readily shared
with me. Hunger, at first, is certainly a very painful sensation;
but when it has continued for some time, this pain is succeeded by
languor and debility; in which case, a draught of water, by keeping
the stomach distended, will greatly exhilarate the spirits, and
remove for a short time every sort of uneasiness. Johnson and Demba
were very much dejected. They lay stretched upon the sand, in a sort
of torpid slumber; and even when the kouskous arrived, I found some
difficulty in awakening them. I felt no inclination to sleep, but was
affected with a deep convulsive respiration, like constant sighing;
and, what alarmed me still more, a dimness of sight, and a tendency
to faint when I attempted to sit up. These symptoms did not go off
until some time after I had received nourishment.

We had been for some days in daily expectation of Ali’s return from
Saheel (or the north country) with his wife Fatima. In the meanwhile
Mansong, King of Bambarra, as I have related in Chapter VIII, had sent
to Ali for a party of horse to assist in storming Gedingooma. With
this demand Ali had not only refused to comply, but had treated the
messengers with great haughtiness and contempt; upon which Mansong
gave up all thoughts of taking the town, and prepared to chastize
Ali for his contumacy.

Things were in this situation when, on the 29th of April, a messenger
arrived at Benowm with the disagreeable intelligence that the Bambarra
army was approaching the frontiers of Ludamar. This threw the whole
country into confusion; and in the afternoon Ali’s son with about
twenty horsemen arrived at Benowm. He ordered all the cattle to be
driven away immediately, all the tents to be struck, and the people
to hold themselves in readiness to depart at daylight the next morning.

April 30th. At daybreak the whole camp was in motion. The baggage was
carried upon bullocks, the two tent poles being placed one on each
side, and the different wooden articles of the tent distributed in
like manner; the tent cloth was thrown over all, and upon this was
commonly placed one or two women; for the Moorish women are very bad
walkers. The king’s favourite concubines rode upon camels, with a
saddle of a particular construction, and a canopy to shelter them from
the sun. We proceeded to the northward until noon, when the king’s
son ordered the whole company, except two tents, to enter a thick low
wood, which was upon our right. I was sent along with the two tents,
and arrived in the evening at a Negro town called Farani: here we
pitched the tents in an open place, at no great distance from the town.

The hurry and confusion which attended this decampment, prevented the
slaves from dressing the usual quantity of victuals; and lest their
dry provisions should be exhausted before they reached their place of
destination, (for as yet none but Ali and the chief men knew whither
we were going,) they thought proper to make me observe this day as
a day of fasting.

May 1st. As I had some reason to suspect that this day was also to
be considered as a fast, I went in the morning to the Negro town of
Farani, and begged some provisions from the Dooti, who readily supplied
my wants, and desired me to come to his house every day during my stay
in the neighbourhood. These hospitable people are looked upon by the
Moors as an abject race of slaves, and are treated accordingly. Two of
Ali’s household slaves, a man and a woman, who had come along with
the two tents, went this morning to water the cattle from the town
wells, at which there began to be a great scarcity. When the Negro
women observed the cattle approaching, they took up their pitchers and
ran with all possible haste towards the town, but before they could
enter the gate, they were stopped by the slaves, who compelled them
to bring back the water they had drawn for their own families, and
empty it into the troughs for the cattle. When this was exhausted,
they were ordered to draw water until such time as the cattle had
all drank; and the woman slave actually broke two wooden bowls over
the heads of the black girls, because they were somewhat dilatory in
obeying her commands.

May 3d. We departed from the vicinity of Farani, and after a
circuitous route through the woods, arrived at Ali’s camp in
the afternoon. This encampment was larger than that of Benowm, and
was situated in the middle of a thick wood about two miles distant
from a Negro town, called Bubaker. I immediately waited upon Ali, in
order to pay my respects to Queen Fatima, who had come with him from
Saheel. He seemed much pleased with my coming; shook hands with me,
and informed his wife that I was the Christian. She was a woman of
the Arab cast, with long black hair, and remarkably corpulent. She
appeared at first rather shocked at the thought of having a Christian
so near her: but when I had (by means of a Negro boy, who spoke the
Mandingo and Arabic tongues) answered a great many questions, which
her curiosity suggested, respecting the country of the Christians,
she seemed more at ease, and presented me with a bowl of milk; which
I considered as a very favourable omen.

The heat was now almost insufferable; all nature seemed sinking under
it. The distant country presented to the eye a dreary expanse of sand,
with a few stunted trees and prickly bushes, in the shade of which
the hungry cattle licked up the withered grass, while the camels and
goats picked off the scanty foliage. The scarcity of water was greater
here than at Benowm. Day and night the wells were crowded with cattle,
lowing and fighting with each other to come at the trough: excessive
thirst made many of them furious; others, being too weak to contend
for the water, endeavoured to quench their thirst by devouring the
black mud from the gutters near the wells; which they did with great
avidity, though it was commonly fatal to them.

This great scarcity of water was felt severely by all the people
of the camp, and by none more than myself; for though Ali allowed
me a skin for containing water, and Fatima, once or twice, gave me
a small supply, when I was in distress, yet such was the barbarous
disposition of the Moors at the wells, that, when my boy attempted
to fill the skin, he commonly received a sound drubbing for his
presumption. Every one was astonished that the slave of a Christian
should attempt to draw water from wells which had been dug by the
followers of the Prophet. This treatment, at length, so frightened
the boy, that I believe he would sooner have perished with thirst,
than attempted again to fill the skin; he therefore contented himself
with begging water from the Negro slaves that attended the camp; and
I followed his example; but with very indifferent success; for though
I let no opportunity slip, and was very urgent in my solicitations,
both to the Moors and Negroes, I was but ill supplied, and frequently
passed the night in the situation of _Tantalus_. No sooner had I shut
my eyes, than fancy would convey me to the streams and rivers of my
native land: there, as I wandered along the verdant brink, I surveyed
the clear stream with transport, and hastened to swallow the delightful
draught;—but alas! disappointment awakened me; and I found myself
a lonely captive, perishing of thirst amidst the wilds of Africa!

One night, having solicited in vain for water at the camp, and
being quite feverish, I resolved to try my fortune at the wells,
which were about half a mile distant from the camp. Accordingly,
I set out about midnight, and, being guided by the lowing of the
cattle, soon arrived at the place; where I found the Moors very busy
drawing water. I requested permission to drink, but was driven away,
with outrageous abuse. Passing, however, from one well to another,
I came at last to one where there was only an old man and two
boys. I made the same request to this man, and he immediately drew
me up a bucket of water; but, as I was about to take hold of it, he
recollected that I was a Christian, and fearing that his bucket might
be polluted by my lips, he dashed the water into the trough, and told
me to drink from thence. Though this trough was none of the largest,
and three cows were already drinking in it, I resolved to come in for
my share; and kneeling down, thrust my head between two of the cows,
and drank with great pleasure, until the water was nearly exhausted;
and the cows began to contend with each other for the last mouthful.

In adventures of this nature, I passed the sultry month of May,
during which no material change took place in my situation. Ali still
considered me as a lawful prisoner; and Fatima, though she allowed me
a larger quantity of victuals than I had been accustomed to receive
at Benowm, had as yet said nothing on the subject of my release. In
the meantime, the frequent changes of the wind, the gathering clouds,
and distant lightning, with other appearances of approaching rain,
indicated that the wet season was at hand; when the Moors annually
evacuate the country of the Negroes, and return to the skirts of the
Great Desert. This made me consider that my fate was drawing towards
a crisis, and I resolved to wait for the event without any seeming
uneasiness: but circumstances occurred which produced a change in my
favour, more suddenly than I had foreseen, or had reason to expect. The
case was this: the fugitive Kaartans, who had taken refuge in Ludamar,
as I have related in Chapter VIII. finding that the Moors were about
to leave them, and dreading the resentment of their own sovereign,
whom they had so basely deserted, offered to treat with Ali, for two
hundred Moorish horsemen, to co-operate with them in an effort to
expel Daisy from Gedingooma; for until Daisy should be vanquished, or
humbled, they considered that they could neither return to their native
towns, nor live in security in any of the neighbouring kingdoms. With
a view to extort money from these people, by means of this treaty, Ali
dispatched his son to Jarra, and prepared to follow him in the course
of a few days. This was an opportunity of too great consequence to me,
to be neglected. I immediately applied to Fatima (who, I found, had the
chief direction in all affairs of state), and begged her interest with
Ali, to give me permission to accompany him to Jarra. This request,
after some hesitation, was favourably received. Fatima looked kindly
on me, and, I believe, was at length moved with compassion towards
me. My bundles were brought from the large cow-skin bag that stood in
the corner of Ali’s tent, and I was ordered to explain the use of
the different articles, and shew the method of putting on the boots,
stockings, &c.; with all which I cheerfully complied, and was told
that, in the course of a few days, I should be at liberty to depart.

Believing, therefore, that I should certainly find the means of
escaping from Jarra, if I should once get thither; I now freely
indulged the pleasing hope that my captivity would soon terminate;
and happily not having been disappointed in this idea, I shall pause,
in this place, to collect and bring into one point of view, such
observations on the Moorish character, and country, as I had no fair
opportunity of introducing into the preceding narrative.




                              CHAPTER XII.                              

_Containing some further miscellaneous Reflections on the Moorish
Character, and Manners. — Observations concerning the Great Desert,
its Animals, wild and domestic, &c. &c._


The Moors of this part of Africa, are divided into many separate
tribes; of which the most formidable, according to what was reported
to me, are those of Trasart and Il Braken, which inhabit the
northern bank of the Senegal river. The tribes of Gedumah, Jafnoo,
and Ludamar, though not so numerous as the former, are nevertheless
very powerful and warlike; and are each governed by a chief, or king,
who exercises absolute jurisdiction over his own horde, without
acknowledging allegiance to a common sovereign. In time of peace,
the employment of the people is pasturage. The Moors, indeed, subsist
chiefly on the flesh of their cattle; and are always in the extreme
of either gluttony or abstinence. In consequence of the frequent and
severe fasts which their religion enjoins, and the toilsome journies,
which they sometimes undertake across the Desert, they are enabled to
bear both hunger and thirst, with surprising fortitude, but whenever
opportunities occur of satisfying their appetite, they generally devour
more at one meal, than would serve an European for three. They pay but
little attention to agriculture; purchasing their corn, cotton-cloth,
and other necessaries, from the Negroes, in exchange for salt, which
they dig from the pits in the Great Desert.

The natural barrenness of the country is such, that it furnishes but
few materials for manufacture. The Moors, however, contrive to weave
a strong cloth, with which they cover their tents: the thread is spun
by their women, from the hair of goats; and they prepare the hides
of their cattle, so as to furnish saddles, bridles, pouches, and
other articles of leather. They are likewise sufficiently skilful,
to convert the native iron, which they procure from the Negroes,
into spears and knives, and also into pots for boiling their food;
but their sabres and other weapons, as well as their fire-arms and
ammunition, they purchase from the Europeans, in exchange for the Negro
slaves which they obtain in their predatory excursions. Their chief
commerce of this kind is with the French traders, on the Senegal river.

The Moors are rigid Mahomedans, and possess, with the bigotry and
superstition, all the intolerance, of their sect. They have no
mosques at Benowm, but perform their devotions in a sort of open
shed, or inclosure made of mats. The priest is, at the same time,
schoolmaster to the juniors. His pupils assemble every evening before
his tent; where, by the light of a large fire, made of brush-wood
and cows’ dung, they are taught a few sentences from the Koran,
and are initiated into the principles of their creed. Their alphabet
differs but little from that in Richardson’s Arabic Grammar. They
always write with the vowel points. Their priests even affect to know
something of foreign literature. The priest of Benowm assured me, that
he could read the writings of the Christians: he shewed me a number of
barbarous characters, which he asserted were the Roman alphabet; and he
produced another specimen, equally unintelligible, which he declared
to be the _Kallam il Indi_, or Persian. His library consisted of nine
volumes in quarto; most of them, I believe, were books of religion;
for the name of Mahomet appeared, in red letters, in almost every
page of each. His scholars wrote their lessons upon thin boards;
paper being too expensive for general use. The boys were diligent
enough, and appeared to possess a considerable share of emulation;
carrying their boards slung over their shoulders, when about their
common employments. When a boy has committed to memory a few of their
prayers, and can read and write certain parts of the Koran, he is
reckoned sufficiently instructed; and, with this slender stock of
learning, commences his career of life. Proud of his acquirements,
he surveys with contempt the unlettered Negro; and embraces every
opportunity of displaying his superiority over such of his countrymen,
as are not distinguished by the same accomplishments.

The education of the girls is neglected altogether: mental
accomplishments are but little attended to by the women; nor is
the want of them considered by the men, as a defect in the female
character. They are regarded, I believe, as an inferior species
of animals; and seem to be brought up for no other purpose, than
that of administering to the sensual pleasures of their imperious
masters. Voluptuousness is, therefore, considered as their chief
accomplishment, and slavish submission as their indispensable duty.

The Moors have singular ideas of feminine perfection. The gracefulness
of figure and motion, and a countenance enlivened by expression,
are by no means essential points in their standard: with them,
corpulence and beauty appear to be terms nearly synonymous. A woman,
of even moderate pretensions, must be one who cannot walk without a
slave under each arm, to support her; and a perfect beauty is a load
for a camel. In consequence of this prevalent taste for unwieldiness
of bulk, the Moorish ladies take great pains to acquire it early in
life; and for this purpose, many of the young girls are compelled,
by their mothers, to devour a great quantity of kouskous, and drink
a large bowl of camels’ milk every morning. It is of no importance,
whether the girl has an appetite or not; the kouskous and milk must be
swallowed; and obedience is frequently enforced by blows. I have seen
a poor girl sit crying, with the bowl at her lips, for more than an
hour; and her mother, with a stick in her hand, watching her all the
while, and using the stick without mercy, whenever she observed that
her daughter was not swallowing. This singular practice, instead of
producing indigestion and disease, soon covers the young lady with that
degree of plumpness, which, in the eye of a Moor, is perfection itself.

As the Moors purchase all their clothing from the Negroes, the women
are forced to be very economical in the article of dress. In general,
they content themselves with a broad piece of cotton cloth, which is
wrapped round the middle, and hangs down like a petticoat, almost to
the ground: to the upper part of this, are sewed two square pieces,
one before, and the other behind, which are fastened together over
the shoulders. The head-dress, is commonly a bandage of cotton cloth,
with some parts of it broader than others, which serve to conceal
the face when they walk in the sun; frequently, however, when they
go abroad, they veil themselves from head to foot.

The employment of the women varies, according to their degrees of
opulence. Queen Fatima, and a few others of high rank, like the
great ladies in some parts of Europe, pass their time chiefly
in conversing with their visitors, performing their devotions;
or admiring their charms in a looking-glass. The women of inferior
class, employ themselves in different domestic duties. They are very
vain, and talkative; and when any thing puts them out of humour,
they commonly vent their anger upon their female slaves, over whom
they rule with severe and despotic authority; which leads me to
observe, that the condition of these poor captives is deplorably
wretched. At daybreak, they are compelled to fetch water from the
wells, in large skins, called _girbas_; and as soon as they have
brought water enough to serve the family for the day, as well as
the horses (for the Moors seldom give their horses the trouble of
going to the wells), they are then employed in pounding the corn,
and dressing the victuals. This being always done in the open air,
the slaves are exposed to the combined heat of the sun, the sand,
and the fire. In the intervals, it is their business to sweep the
tent, churn the milk, and perform other domestic offices. With all
this they are badly fed, and oftentimes cruelly punished.

The men’s dress, among the Moors of Ludamar, differs but little
from that of the Negroes (which has been already described,) except
that they have all adopted that characteristic of the Mahomedan
sect, the _turban_; which is here universally made of white cotton
cloth. Such of the Moors as have long beards, display them with a
mixture of pride and satisfaction, as denoting an Arab ancestry. Of
this number was Ali himself; but among the generality of the people,
the hair is short and bushy, and universally black. And here I may
be permitted to observe, that if any one circumstance excited among
them favourable thoughts towards my own person, it was my beard;
which was now grown to an enormous length, and was always beheld with
approbation or envy. I believe in my conscience, they thought it too
good a beard for a Christian.

The only diseases which I observed to prevail among the Moors, were the
intermittent fever, and dysentery: for the cure of which, nostrums are
sometimes administered by their old women; but, in general, nature is
left to her own operations. Mention was made to me of the small-pox,
as being sometimes very destructive; but it had not, to my knowledge,
made its appearance in Ludamar, while I was in captivity. That it
prevails, however, among some tribes of the Moors, and that it is
frequently conveyed by them to the Negroes in the southern states,
I was assured, on the authority of Dr. Laidley; who also informed me,
that the Negroes on the Gambia practise inoculation.

The administration of criminal justice, as far as I had opportunities
of observing, was prompt and decisive. For, although civil rights
were but little regarded in Ludamar, it was necessary, when crimes
were committed, that examples should sometimes be made. On such
occasions, the offender was brought before Ali, who pronounced, of
his sole authority, what judgment he thought proper. But I understood
that capital punishment was seldom or never inflicted, except on
the Negroes.

Although the wealth of the Moors consists chiefly in their numerous
herds of cattle; yet, as the pastoral life does not afford full
employment, the majority of the people are perfectly idle, and spend
the day in trifling conversation about their horses, or in laying
schemes of depredation on the Negro villages.

The usual place of rendezvous for the indolent, is the King’s tent;
where great liberty of speech seems to be exercised by the company
towards each other; while in speaking of their chief, they express but
one opinion. In praise of their sovereign, they are unanimous. Songs
are composed in his honour, which the company frequently sing in
concert; but they are so loaded with gross adulation, that no man
but a Moorish despot, could hear them without blushing. The king is
distinguished by the fineness of his dress; which is composed of blue
cotton cloth, brought from Tombuctoo, or white linen or muslin from
Morocco. He has likewise a larger tent than any other person, with a
white cloth over it: but, in his usual intercourse with his subjects,
all distinctions of rank are frequently forgotten. He sometimes eats
out of the same bowl with his camel driver, and reposes himself, during
the heat of the day, upon the same bed. The expences of his government
and household are defrayed by a tax upon his Negro subjects, which
is paid by every householder, either in corn, cloth, or gold dust;
a tax upon the different Moorish Korrees, or watering-places, which
is commonly levied in cattle; and a tax upon all merchandize which
passes through the kingdom, and is generally collected in kind. But
a considerable part of the king’s revenue arises from the plunder
of individuals. The Negro inhabitants of Ludamar, and the travelling
merchants, are afraid of appearing rich; for Ali, who has spies
stationed in the different towns, to give him information concerning
the wealth of his subjects, frequently invents some frivolous plea
for seizing their property, and reducing the opulent to a level with
their fellow citizens.

Of the number of Ali’s Moorish subjects, I had no means of forming
a correct estimate. The military strength of Ludamar consists in
cavalry. They are well mounted, and appear to be very expert in
skirmishing and attacking by surprise. Every soldier furnishes his
own horse, and finds his accoutrements, consisting of a large sabre,
a double barrelled gun, a small red leather bag for holding his
balls, and a powder horn slung over the shoulder. He has no pay, nor
any remuneration but what arises from plunder. This body is not very
numerous; for when Ali made war upon Bambarra, I was informed that his
whole force did not exceed two thousand cavalry. They constitute,
however, by what I could learn, but a very small proportion of
his Moorish subjects. The horses are very beautiful, and so highly
esteemed, that the Negro princes will sometimes give from twelve to
fourteen slaves for one horse.

Ludamar has for its northern boundary, the Great Desert of Sahara. From
the best inquiries I could make, this vast ocean of sand, which
occupies so large a space in Northern Africa, may be pronounced
almost destitute of inhabitants; except where the scanty vegetation
which appears in certain spots, affords pasturage for the flocks of
a few miserable Arabs, who wander from one well to another. In other
places, where the supply of water and pasturage is more abundant,
small parties of the Moors have taken up their residence. Here they
live, in independent poverty, secure from the tyrannical government of
Barbary. But the greater part of the Desert, being totally destitute of
water, is seldom visited by any human being; unless where the trading
caravans trace out their toilsome and dangerous route across it. In
some parts of this extensive waste, the ground is covered with low
stunted shrubs, which serve as landmarks for the caravans, and furnish
the camels with a scanty forage. In other parts, the disconsolate
wanderer, wherever he turns, sees nothing around him but a vast
interminable expanse of sand and sky; a gloomy and barren void, where
the eye finds no particular object to rest upon, and the mind is filled
with painful apprehensions of perishing with thirst. “Surrounded by
this dreary solitude, the traveller sees the dead bodies of birds,
that the violence of the wind has brought from happier regions;
and, as he ruminates on the fearful length of his remaining passage,
listens with horror to the voice of the driving blast; the only sound
that interrupts the awful repose of the Desert.”[12]

The few wild animals which inhabit these melancholy regions, are
the antelope and the ostrich; their swiftness of foot enabling them
to reach the distant watering-places. On the skirts of the Desert,
where water is more plentiful, are found lions, panthers, elephants,
and wild boars.

Of domestic animals, the only one that can endure the fatigue of
crossing the Desert, is the camel. By the particular conformation of
the stomach, he is enabled to carry a supply of water sufficient for
ten or twelve days; his broad and yielding foot, is well adapted for
a sandy country; and by a singular motion of his upper lip, he picks
the smallest leaves from the thorny shrubs of the Desert as he passes
along. The camel is, therefore, the only beast of burden employed
by the trading caravans, which traverse the Desert in different
directions, from Barbary to Nigritia. As this useful and docile
creature has been sufficiently described by systematical writers,
it is unnecessary for me to enlarge upon his properties. I shall
only add, that his flesh, though to my own taste dry and unsavoury,
is preferred by the Moors to any other; and that the milk of the female
is in universal esteem, and is indeed sweet, pleasant, and nutritive.

I have observed that the Moors, in their complexion, resemble the
Mulattoes of the West Indies; but they have something unpleasant in
their aspect, which the Mulattoes have not. I fancied that I discovered
in the features of most of them, a disposition towards cruelty,
and low cunning; and I could never contemplate their physiognomy,
without feeling sensible uneasiness. From the staring wildness of
their eyes, a stranger would immediately set them down as a nation
of lunatics. The treachery and malevolence of their character,
are manifested in their plundering excursions against the Negro
villages. Oftentimes, without the smallest provocation, and sometimes,
under the fairest professions of friendship, they will suddenly seize
upon the Negroes’ cattle, and even on the inhabitants themselves. The
Negroes very seldom retaliate. The enterprizing boldness of the Moors,
their knowledge of the country, and, above all, the superior fleetness
of their horses, make them such formidable enemies, that the petty
Negro states which border upon the Desert, are in continual terror
while the Moorish tribes are in the vicinity, and are too much awed
to think of resistance.

Like the roving Arabs, the Moors frequently remove from one place to
another; according to the season of the year, or the convenience of
pasturage. In the month of February, when the heat of the sun scorches
up every sort of vegetation in the Desert, they strike their tents, and
approach the Negro country to the south; where they reside until the
rains commence, in the month of July. At this time, having purchased
corn, and other necessaries from the Negroes, in exchange for salt,
they again depart to the northward, and continue in the Desert until
the rains are over, and that part of the country becomes burnt up
and barren.

This wandering and restless way of life, while it inures them to
hardships, strengthens, at the same time, the bonds of their little
society, and creates in them an aversion towards strangers, which is
almost insurmountable. Cut off from all intercourse with civilized
nations, and boasting an advantage over the Negroes, by possessing,
though in a very limited degree, the knowledge of letters, they are
at once the vainest and proudest, and, perhaps, the most bigotted,
ferocious, and intolerant of all the nations on the earth: combining
in their character, the blind superstition of the Negro, with the
savage cruelty and treachery of the Arab.

It is probable that many of them had never beheld a white man,
before my arrival at Benowm: but they had all been taught to regard
the Christian name with inconceivable abhorrence, and to consider
it nearly as lawful to murder a European, as it would be to kill
a dog. The melancholy fate of Major Houghton, and the treatment I
experienced during my confinement among them, will, I trust, serve
as a warning to future travellers to avoid this inhospitable district.

The reader may probably have expected from me a more detailed and
copious account of the manners, customs, superstitions, and prejudices,
of this secluded and singular people; but it must not be forgotten,
that the wretchedness of my situation among them, afforded me but few
opportunities of collecting information. Some particulars, however,
might be added in this place; but being equally applicable to the
Negroes to the southward, they will appear in a subsequent page.


[Footnote 12: Proceedings of the African Association, Part I.]




                             CHAPTER XIII.                              

_Ali departs for Jarra, and the Author allowed to follow him
thither. — The Author’s faithful Servant, Demba, seized by
Ali’s Order, and sent back into Slavery. — Ali returns to his
Camp, and permits the Author to remain at Jarra, who, thenceforward,
meditates his Escape. — Daisy, King of Kaarta, approaching with
his Army towards Jarra, the Inhabitants quit the Town, and the Author
accompanies them in their Flight. — A Party of Moors overtake him at
Queira. — He gets away from them at Daybreak: — is again pursued
by another Party, and robbed; but finally effects his Escape._


Having, as hath been related, obtained permission to accompany Ali to
Jarra, I took leave of Queen Fatima, who with much grace and civility,
returned me part of my apparel; and the evening before my departure,
my horse, with the saddle and bridle, were sent me by Ali’s order.

Early on the morning of the 26th of May, I departed from the camp of
Bubaker, accompanied by my two attendants, Johnson and Demba, and a
number of Moors on horseback; Ali, with about fifty horsemen, having
gone privately from the camp during the night. We stopped about noon
at Farani, and were there joined by twelve Moors riding upon camels,
and with them we proceeded to a watering-place in the woods, where
we overtook Ali and his fifty horsemen. They were lodged in some low
shepherds’ tents near the wells. As the company was numerous, the
tents could scarcely accommodate us all; and I was ordered to sleep
in the open space, in the centre of the tents, where every one might
observe my motions. During the night, there was much lightning from
the north-east; and about daybreak a very heavy sand-wind commenced,
which continued with great violence until four in the afternoon. The
quantity of sand which passed to the westward in the course of this
day, must have been prodigiously great. At times it was impossible to
look up; and the cattle were so tormented by the particles lodging
in their ears and eyes, that they ran about like mad creatures,
and I was in continual danger of being trampled to death by them.

May 28th. Early in the morning the Moors saddled their horses,
and Ali’s chief slave ordered me to get in readiness. In a little
time the same messenger returned, and taking my boy by the shoulder,
told him in the Mandingo language, that “Ali was to be his master
in future;” and then turning to me, “the business is settled
at last (said he); the boy, and every thing but your horse, goes
back to Bubaker; but you may take the old fool (meaning Johnson the
interpreter) with you to Jarra.” I made him no answer; but being
shocked beyond description at the idea of losing the poor boy, I
hastened to Ali, who was at breakfast before his tent, surrounded by
many of his courtiers. I told him (perhaps in rather too passionate
a strain,) that whatever imprudence I had been guilty of, in coming
into his country, I thought I had already been sufficiently punished
for it, by being so long detained; and then plundered of all my little
property; which, however, gave me no uneasiness, when compared with
what he had just now done to me. I observed, that the boy which
he had now seized upon, was not a slave, and had been accused of
no offence: he was indeed one of my attendants; and his faithful
services in that station, had procured him his freedom: his fidelity
and attachment had made him follow me into my present situation; and
as he looked up to me for protection, I could not see him deprived of
his liberty, without remonstrating against such an act, as the height
of cruelty and injustice. Ali made no reply, but with a haughty air
and malignant smile, told his interpreter, that if I did not mount my
horse immediately, he would send me back likewise. There is something
in the frown of a tyrant which rouzes the most secret emotions of the
heart: I could not suppress my feelings; and for once entertained an
indignant wish to rid the world of such a monster.

Poor Demba was not less affected than myself; he had formed a strong
attachment towards me, and had a cheerfulness of disposition, which
often beguiled the tedious hours of captivity: he was likewise a
proficient in the Bambarra tongue, and promised on that account to
be of great utility to me in future. But it was in vain to expect
any thing favourable to humanity, from people who are strangers to
its dictates. So having shaken hands with this unfortunate boy, and
blended my tears with his, assuring him, however, that I would do my
utmost to redeem him, I saw him led off by three of Ali’s slaves,
towards the camp at Bubaker.

When the Moors had mounted their horses, I was ordered to follow them;
and after a toilsome journey through the woods, in a very sultry day,
we arrived in the afternoon at a walled village, called Doombani;
where we remained two days, waiting for the arrival of some horsemen
from the northward.

On the 1st of June, we departed from Doombani towards Jarra. Our
company now amounted to two hundred men, all on horseback; for the
Moors never use infantry in their wars. They appeared capable of
enduring great fatigue; but from their total want of discipline, our
journey to Jarra was more like a fox-chase, than the march of an army.

At Jarra, I took up my lodging at the house of my old acquaintance,
Daman Jumma; and informed him of every thing that had befallen me. I
particularly requested him to use his interest with Ali, to redeem
my boy, and promised him a bill upon Dr. Laidley, for the value of
two slaves, the moment he brought him to Jarra. Daman very readily
undertook to negotiate the business; but found that Ali considered the
boy as my principal interpreter, and was unwilling to part with him,
lest he should fall a second time into my hands; and be instrumental
in conducting me to Bambarra. Ali therefore put off the matter from
day to day; but withal told Daman, that if he wished to purchase the
boy for himself, he should have him thereafter, at the common price
of a slave; which Daman agreed to pay for him, whenever Ali should
send him to Jarra.

The chief object of Ali, in this journey to Jarra, as I have already
related, was to procure money from such of the Kaartans, as had taken
refuge in his country. Some of these had solicited his protection, to
avoid the horrors of war; but by far the greatest number of them were
dissatisfied men, who wished the ruin of their own sovereign. These
people no sooner heard that the Bambarran army had returned to
Sego without subduing Daisy, as was generally expected, than they
resolved to make a sudden attack themselves upon him, before he could
recruit his forces, which were now known to be much diminished by a
bloody campaign, and in great want of provisions. With this view,
they solicited the Moors to join them, and offered to hire of Ali
two hundred horsemen; which Ali, with the warmest professions of
friendship, agreed to furnish, upon condition that they should
previously supply him with four hundred head of cattle, two hundred
garments of blue cloth, and a considerable quantity of beads and
ornaments. The raising this impost, somewhat perplexed them; and
in order to procure the cattle, they persuaded the king to demand
one-half the stipulated number from the people of Jarra; promising to
replace them in a short time. Ali agreed to this proposal, and the
same evening (June 2d) the drum was sent through the town; and the
crier announced, that if any person suffered his cattle to go into
the woods, the next morning, before the king had chosen his quota
of them, his house should be plundered, and his slaves taken from
him. The people dared not disobey the proclamation; and next morning
about two hundred of their best cattle were selected, and delivered
to the Moors: the full complement was made up afterwards, by means
equally unjust and arbitrary.

June 8th. In the afternoon, Ali sent his chief slave to inform me,
that he was about to return to Bubaker; but as he would only stay
there a few days, to keep the approaching festival (_Banna Salee_),
and then return to Jarra, I had permission to remain with Daman
until his return. This was joyful news to me; but I had experienced
so many disappointments, that I was unwilling to indulge the hope of
its being true, until Johnson came and told me that Ali, with part
of the horsemen, were actually gone from the town, and that the rest
were to follow him in the morning.

June 9th. Early in the morning, the remainder of the Moors departed
from the town. They had, during their stay, committed many acts
of robbery; and this morning, with the most unparalleled audacity,
they seized upon three girls, who were bringing water from the wells,
and carried them away into slavery.

The anniversary of _Banna Salee_, at Jarra, very well deserved to be
called a festival. The slaves were all finely clad on this occasion,
and the householders vied with each other in providing large quantities
of victuals, which they distributed to all their neighbours, with the
greatest profusion: hunger was literally banished from the town; man,
woman, and child, bond and free, all had as much as they could eat.

June 12th. Two people, dreadfully wounded, were discovered at a
watering-place, in the woods; one of them had just breathed his last,
but the other was brought alive to Jarra. On recovering a little,
he informed the people, that he had fled through the woods from
Kasson; that Daisy had made war upon Sambo, the king of that country;
had surprised three of his towns, and put all the inhabitants to the
sword. He enumerated by name, many of the friends of the Jarra people,
who had been murdered in Kasson. This intelligence made the death-howl
universal in Jarra, for the space of two days.

This piece of bad news, was followed by another, not less
distressing. A number of runaway slaves, arrived from Kaarta on the
14th, and reported that Daisy, having received information concerning
the intended attack upon him, was about to visit Jarra. This made
the Negroes call upon Ali for the two hundred horsemen, which he was
to furnish them, according to engagement. But Ali paid very little
attention to their remonstrances; and at last plainly told them,
that his cavalry were otherwise employed. The Negroes, thus deserted
by the Moors, and fully apprized that the king of Kaarta would shew
them as little clemency, as he had shewn the inhabitants of Kasson,
resolved to collect all their forces, and hazard a battle before the
king, who was now in great distress for want of provisions, should
become too powerful for them. They therefore assembled about eight
hundred effective men in the whole; and with these they entered Kaarta,
on the evening of the 18th of June.

June 19th. This morning the wind shifted to the south-west; and about
two o’clock in the afternoon, we had a heavy tornado, or thunder
squall, accompanied with rain, which greatly revived the face of
nature, and gave a pleasant coolness to the air. This was the first
rain that had fallen for many months.

As every attempt to redeem my boy had hitherto been unsuccessful,
and in all probability would continue to prove so, whilst I remained
in the country; I found that it was necessary for me to come to some
determination concerning my own safety, before the rains should be
fully set in; for my landlord, seeing no likelihood of being paid
for his trouble, began to wish me away; and Johnson, my interpreter,
refusing to proceed, my situation became very perplexing. If I
continued where I was, I foresaw that I must soon fall a victim
to the barbarity of the Moors; and yet if I went forward singly,
it was evident that I must sustain great difficulties, both from
the want of means to purchase the necessaries of life, and of
an interpreter to make myself understood. On the other hand, to
return to England without accomplishing the object of my mission,
was worse than either. I therefore determined to avail myself of the
first opportunity of escaping, and to proceed directly for Bambarra,
as soon as the rains had set in for a few days, so as to afford me
the certainty of finding water in the woods.

Such was my situation, when, on the evening of the 24th of June, I was
startled by the report of some muskets close to the town, and inquiring
the reason, was informed that the Jarra army had returned from fighting
Daisy, and that this firing was by way of rejoicing. However, when
the chief men of the town had assembled, and heard a full detail of
the expedition, they were by no means relieved from their uneasiness
on Daisy’s account. The deceitful Moors having drawn back from the
confederacy, after being hired by the Negroes, greatly dispirited
the insurgents; who, instead of finding Daisy with a few friends
concealed in the strong fortress of Gedingooma, had found him at a
town near Joka, in the open country, surrounded by so numerous an
army, that every attempt to attack him was at once given up; and the
confederates only thought of enriching themselves, by the plunder of
the small towns in the neighbourhood. They accordingly fell upon two
of Daisy’s towns, and carried off the whole of the inhabitants;
but lest intelligence of this might reach Daisy, and induce him to
cut off their retreat, they returned through the woods by night,
bringing with them the slaves and cattle which they had captured.

June 26th. This afternoon, a spy from Kaarta, brought the alarming
intelligence, that Daisy had taken Simbing in the morning, and would
be in Jarra some time in the course of the ensuing day. A number of
people were immediately stationed on the tops of the rocks, and in the
different passages leading into the town, to give early intelligence
of Daisy’s motions; and the women set about making the necessary
preparations for quitting the town as soon as possible. They continued
beating corn, and packing up different articles, during the night;
and early in the morning, nearly one half of the townspeople took
the road for Bambarra, by the way of Deena.

Their departure was very affecting: the women and children crying;
the men sullen and dejected; and all of them looking back with regret
on their native town; and on the wells and rocks, beyond which their
ambition had never tempted them to stray, and where they had laid all
their plans of future happiness; all of which they were now forced
to abandon, and to seek shelter among strangers.

June 27th. About eleven o’clock in the forenoon, we were alarmed by
the centinels, who brought information that Daisy was on his march
towards Jarra, and that the confederate army had fled before him
without firing a gun. The terror of the townspeople on this occasion
is not easily to be described.—Indeed, the screams of the women and
children, and the great hurry and confusion that every where prevailed,
made me suspect that the Kaartans had already entered the town; and
although I had every reason to be pleased with Daisy’s behaviour to
me, when I was at Kemmoo, I had no wish to expose myself to the mercy
of his army, who might, in the general confusion, mistake me for a
Moor. I therefore mounted my horse, and taking a large bag of corn
before me, rode slowly along with the townspeople, until we reached
the foot of a rocky hill, where I dismounted, and drove my horse up
before me. When I had reached the summit, I sat down, and having a
full view of the town, and the neighbouring country, could not help
lamenting the situation of the poor inhabitants, who were thronging
after me, driving their sheep, cows, goats, &c. and carrying a scanty
portion of provisions, and a few clothes. There was a great noise and
crying every where upon the road; for many aged people and children
were unable to walk, and these, with the sick, were obliged to be
carried, otherwise they must have been left to certain destruction.

About five o’clock we arrived at a small farm, belonging to the
Jarra people, called Kadeeja; and here I found Daman and Johnson
employed in filling large bags of corn, to be carried upon bullocks,
to serve as provisions for Daman’s family on the road.

June 28th. At daybreak, we departed from Kadeeja; and, having passed
Troongoomba, without stopping, arrived in the afternoon at Queira. I
remained here two days, in order to recruit my horse, which the Moors
had reduced to a perfect Rosinante, and to wait for the arrival of
some Mandingo Negroes, who were going for Bambarra in the course of
a few days.

On the afternoon of the 1st of July, as I was tending my horse in
the fields, Ali’s chief slave and four Moors arrived at Queira,
and took up their lodging at the Dooty’s house. My interpreter,
Johnson, who suspected the nature of this visit, sent two boys to
overhear their conversation; from which he learnt that they were sent
to convey me back to Bubaker. The same evening, two of the Moors came
privately to look at my horse, and one of them proposed taking it to
the Dooty’s hut, but the other observed that such a precaution was
unnecessary, as I could never escape upon such an animal. They then
inquired where I slept, and returned to their companions.

All this was like a stroke of thunder to me, for I dreaded nothing
so much as confinement again among the Moors; from whose barbarity
I had nothing but death to expect. I therefore determined to set off
immediately for Bambarra; a measure which I thought offered almost the
only chance of saving my life, and gaining the object of my mission. I
communicated the design to Johnson, who, altho’ he applauded my
resolution, was so far from shewing any inclination to accompany
me, that he solemnly protested, he would rather forfeit his wages,
than go any farther. He told me that Daman had agreed to give him
half the price of a slave for his service, to assist in conducting
a coffle of slaves to Gambia, and that he was determined to embrace
the opportunity of returning to his wife and family.

Having no hopes therefore of persuading him to accompany me, I
resolved to proceed by myself. About midnight I got my clothes in
readiness, which consisted of two shirts, two pair of trowsers, two
pocket-handkerchiefs, an upper and under waistcoat, a hat, and a pair
of half boots; these, with a cloak, constituted my whole wardrobe. And
I had not one single bead, nor any other article of value in my
possession, to purchase victuals for myself, or corn for my horse.

About daybreak, Johnson, who had been listening to the Moors all night,
came and whispered to me that they were asleep. The awful crisis
was now arrived, when I was again either to taste the blessing of
freedom, or languish out my days in captivity. A cold sweat moistened
my forehead, as I thought on the dreadful alternative, and reflected,
that, one way or the other, my fate must be decided in the course of
the ensuing day. But to deliberate, was to lose the only chance of
escaping. So, taking up my bundle, I stepped gently over the Negroes,
who were sleeping in the open air, and having mounted my horse, I
bade Johnson farewell, desiring him to take particular care of the
papers I had entrusted him with, and inform my friends in Gambia that
he had left me in good health, on my way to Bambarra.

I proceeded with great caution; surveying each bush, and frequently
listening and looking behind me for the Moorish horsemen, until I was
about a mile from the town, when I was surprised to find myself in
the neighbourhood of a Korree, belonging to the Moors. The shepherds
followed me for about a mile, hooting and throwing stones after me; and
when I was out of their reach, and had begun to indulge the pleasing
hopes of escaping, I was again greatly alarmed to hear somebody holla
behind me; and looking back, I saw three Moors on horseback, coming
after me at full speed; hooping and brandishing their double-barrelled
guns. I knew it was in vain to think of escaping, and therefore turned
back and met them: when two of them caught hold of my bridle, one on
each side, and the third, presenting his musket, told me I must go back
to Ali. When the human mind has for some time been fluctuating between
hope and despair, tortured with anxiety, and hurried from one extreme
to another, it affords a sort of gloomy relief to know the worst that
can possibly happen: such was my situation. An indifference about life,
and all its enjoyments, had completely benumbed my faculties, and I
rode back with the Moors with apparent unconcern. But a change took
place much sooner than I had any reason to expect. In passing through
some thick bushes, one of the Moors ordered me to untie my bundle,
and shew them the contents. Having examined the different articles,
they found nothing worth taking except my cloak, which they considered
as a very valuable acquisition, and one of them pulling it from me,
wrapped it about himself. This cloak had been of great use to me;
it served to cover me from the rains in the day, and to protect me
from the musketoes in the night; I therefore earnestly begged him to
return it, and followed him some little way to obtain it; but without
paying any attention to my request, he and one of his companions rode
off with their prize. When I attempted to follow them, the third, who
had remained with me, struck my horse over the head, and presenting
his musket, told me I should proceed no further. I now perceived
that these men had not been sent by any authority to apprehend me,
but had pursued me solely in the view to rob and plunder me. Turning
my horse’s head therefore once more towards the east, and observing
the Moor follow the track of his confederates, I congratulated myself
on having escaped with my life, though in great distress, from such
a horde of barbarians.

I was no sooner out of sight of the Moor, than I struck into the woods,
to prevent being pursued, and kept pushing on, with all possible speed,
until I found myself near some high rocks, which I remembered to have
seen in my former route from Queira to Deena; and directing my course
a little to the northward, I fortunately fell in with the path.




                              CHAPTER XIV.                              

_The Author feels great Joy at his Deliverance, and proceeds through
the Wilderness, E.S.E.; but finds his Situation very deplorable. —
Suffers greatly from Thirst, and faints on the Sand: — recovers,
and makes another Effort to push forward. — Is providentially
relieved by a Fall of Rain. — Arrives at a Foulah Village, where he
is refused Relief by the Dooty; but obtains Food from a poor Woman. —
Continues his Journey through the Wilderness, and the next Day lights
on another Foulah Village, where he is hospitably received by one of
the Shepherds. — Arrives on the third Day at a Negro Town called
Wawra, tributary to the King of Bambarra._


It is impossible to describe the joy that arose in my mind, when I
looked around and concluded that I was out of danger. I felt like one
recovered from sickness; I breathed freer; I found unusual lightness
in my limbs; even the Desert looked pleasant; and I dreaded nothing
so much as falling in with some wandering parties of Moors, who might
convey me back to the land of thieves and murderers, from which I
had just escaped.

I soon became sensible, however, that my situation was very
deplorable; for I had no means of procuring food, nor prospect of
finding water. About ten o’clock, perceiving a herd of goats feeding
close to the road, I took a circuitous route to avoid being seen;
and continued travelling through the Wilderness, directing my course,
by compass, nearly east-south-east, in order to reach, as soon as
possible, some town or village of the kingdom of Bambarra.

A little after noon, when the burning heat of the sun was reflected
with double violence from the hot sand, and the distant ridges
of the hills, seen through the ascending vapour, seemed to wave
and fluctuate like the unsettled sea, I became faint with thirst,
and climbed a tree in hopes of seeing distant smoke, or some other
appearance of a human habitation; but in vain: nothing appeared all
around but thick underwood, and hillocks of white sand.

About four o’clock, I came suddenly upon a large herd of goats,
and pulling my horse into a bush, I watched to observe if the keepers
were Moors or Negroes. In a little time I perceived two Moorish boys,
and with some difficulty persuaded them to approach me. They informed
me that the herd belonged to Ali, and that they were going to Deena,
where the water was more plentiful, and where they intended to stay,
until the rain had filled the pools in the Desert. They shewed me
their empty water-skins, and told me that they had seen no water in
the woods. This account afforded me but little consolation; however,
it was in vain to repine, and I pushed on as fast as possible, in
hopes of reaching some watering-place in the course of the night. My
thirst was by this time become insufferable; my mouth was parched and
inflamed; a sudden dimness would frequently come over my eyes, with
other symptoms of fainting; and my horse being very much fatigued,
I began seriously to apprehend that I should perish of thirst. To
relieve the burning pain in my mouth and throat, I chewed the leaves of
different shrubs, but found them all bitter, and of no service to me.

A little before sunset, having reached the top of a gentle rising,
I climbed a high tree, from the topmost branches of which I cast a
melancholy look over the barren Wilderness, but without discovering
the most distant trace of a human dwelling. The same dismal uniformity
of shrubs and sand every where presented itself, and the horizon was
as level and uninterrupted as that of the sea.

Descending from the tree, I found my horse devouring the stubble and
brushwood with great avidity; and as I was now too faint to attempt
walking, and my horse too much fatigued to carry me, I thought it
but an act of humanity, and perhaps the last I should ever have it
in my power to perform, to take off his bridle and let him shift
for himself; in doing which I was suddenly affected with sickness
and giddiness; and falling upon the sand, felt as if the hour of
death was fast approaching. “Here then, thought I, after a short
but ineffectual struggle, terminate all my hopes of being useful in
my day and generation: here must the short span of my life come to
an end.”—I cast (as I believed) a last look on the surrounding
scene, and whilst I reflected on the awful change that was about
to take place, this world with its enjoyments seemed to vanish from
my recollection. Nature, however, at length resumed its functions;
and on recovering my senses, I found myself stretched upon the sand,
with the bridle still in my hand, and the sun just sinking behind the
trees. I now summoned all my resolution, and determined to make another
effort to prolong my existence. And as the evening was somewhat cool,
I resolved to travel as far as my limbs would carry me, in hopes of
reaching (my only resource) a watering-place. With this view, I put the
bridle on my horse, and driving him before me, went slowly along for
about an hour, when I perceived some lightning from the north-east;
a most delightful sight; for it promised rain. The darkness and
lightning increased very rapidly; and in less than an hour I heard
the wind roaring among the bushes. I had already opened my mouth to
receive the refreshing drops which I expected; but I was instantly
covered with a cloud of sand, driven with such force by the wind as
to give a very disagreeable sensation to my face and arms; and I was
obliged to mount my horse, and stop under a bush, to prevent being
suffocated. The sand continued to fly in amazing quantities for near an
hour, after which I again set forward, and travelled with difficulty,
until ten o’clock. About this time I was agreeably surprised by
some very vivid flashes of lightning, followed by a few heavy drops
of rain. In a little time the sand ceased to fly, and I alighted, and
spread out all my clean clothes to collect the rain, which at length I
saw would certainly fall. For more than an hour it rained plentifully,
and I quenched my thirst, by wringing and sucking my clothes.

There being no moon, it was remarkably dark, so that I was obliged to
lead my horse, and direct my way by the compass, which the lightning
enabled me to observe. In this manner I travelled, with tolerable
expedition, until past midnight; when, the lightning becoming more
distant, I was under the necessity of groping along, to the no small
danger of my hands and eyes. About two o’clock my horse started at
something, and looking round, I was not a little surprised to see a
light at a short distance among the trees, and supposing it to be a
town, I groped along the sand in hopes of finding corn-stalks, cotton,
or other appearances of cultivation, but found none. As I approached,
I perceived a number of other lights in different places, and began
to suspect that I had fallen upon a party of Moors. However, in my
present situation, I was resolved to see who they were, if I could
do it with safety. I accordingly led my horse cautiously towards the
light, and heard by the lowing of the cattle, and the clamorous tongues
of the herdsmen, that it was a watering-place, and most likely belonged
to the Moors. Delightful as the sound of the human voice was to me,
I resolved once more to strike into the woods, and rather run the
risk of perishing of hunger, than trust myself again in their hands;
but being still thirsty, and dreading the approach of the burning day,
I thought it prudent to search for the wells, which I expected to find
at no great distance. In this pursuit, I inadvertently approached
so near to one of the tents, as to be perceived by a woman, who
immediately screamed out. Two people came running to her assistance
from some of the neighbouring tents, and passed so very near to me,
that I thought I was discovered; and hastened again into the woods.

About a mile from this place, I heard a loud and confused noise
somewhere to the right of my course, and in a short time was happy
to find it was the croaking of frogs, which was heavenly music to my
ears. I followed the sound, and at daybreak arrived at some shallow
muddy pools, so full of frogs, that it was difficult to discern the
water. The noise they made frightened my horse, and I was obliged
to keep them quiet, by beating the water with a branch until he had
drank. Having here quenched my thirst, I ascended a tree, and the
morning being calm, I soon perceived the smoke of the watering-place
which I had passed in the night; and observed another pillar of smoke
east-south-east, distant 12 or 14 miles. Towards this I directed
my route, and reached the cultivated ground a little before eleven
o’clock; where seeing a number of Negroes at work planting corn,
I inquired the name of the town; and was informed that it was a Foulah
village, belonging to Ali, called Shrilla. I had now some doubts about
entering it; but my horse being very much fatigued, and the day growing
hot, not to mention the pangs of hunger which began to assail me, I
resolved to venture; and accordingly rode up to the Dooty’s house,
where I was unfortunately denied admittance, and could not obtain
even a handful of corn, either for myself or horse. Turning from this
inhospitable door, I rode slowly out of the town, and perceiving some
low scattered huts without the walls, I directed my route towards them;
knowing that in Africa, as well as in Europe, hospitality does not
always prefer the highest dwellings. At the door of one of these huts,
an old motherly-looking woman sat, spinning cotton; I made signs to
her that I was hungry, and inquired if she had any victuals with her
in the hut. She immediately laid down her distaff, and desired me, in
Arabic, to come in. When I had seated myself upon the floor, she set
before me a dish of kouskous, that had been left the preceding night,
of which I made a tolerable meal; and in return for this kindness I
gave her one of my pocket-handkerchiefs; begging at the same time,
a little corn for my horse, which she readily brought me.

Overcome with joy at so unexpected a deliverance, I lifted up
my eyes to heaven, and whilst my heart swelled with gratitude, I
returned thanks to that gracious and bountiful Being, whose power
had supported me under so many dangers, and had now spread for me a
table in the Wilderness.

Whilst my horse was feeding, the people began to assemble, and one of
them whispered something to my hostess, which very much excited her
surprise. Though I was not well acquainted with the Foulah language,
I soon discovered that some of the men wished to apprehend and carry me
back to Ali; in hopes, I suppose, of receiving a reward. I therefore
tied up the corn; and lest any one should suspect I had ran away from
the Moors, I took a northerly direction, and went cheerfully along,
driving my horse before me, followed by all the boys and girls of
the town. When I had travelled about two miles, and got quit of all
my troublesome attendants, I struck again into the woods, and took
shelter under a large tree; where I found it necessary to rest myself;
a bundle of twigs serving me for a bed, and my saddle for a pillow.

I was awakened about two o’clock by three Foulahs, who, taking me for
a Moor, pointed to the sun, and told me it was time to pray. Without
entering into conversation with them, I saddled my horse and continued
my journey. I travelled over a level, but more fertile country, than
I had seen for some time, until sunset, when, coming to a path that
took a southerly direction, I followed it until midnight, at which
time I arrived at a small pool of rain-water, and the wood being open,
I determined to rest by it for the night. Having given my horse the
remainder of the corn, I made my bed as formerly: but the musketoes
and flies from the pool prevented sleep for some time, and I was
twice disturbed in the night by wild beasts, which came very near,
and whose howlings kept the horse in continual terror.

July 4th. At daybreak I pursued my course through the woods as
formerly: saw numbers of antelopes, wild hogs, and ostriches; but the
soil was more hilly, and not so fertile as I had found it the preceding
day. About eleven o’clock I ascended an eminence, where I climbed
a tree, and discovered at about eight miles distance, an open part of
the country, with several red spots, which I concluded were cultivated
land; and directing my course that way, came to the precincts of
a watering-place, about one o’clock. From the appearance of the
place, I judged it to belong to the Foulahs, and was hopeful that I
should meet a better reception than I had experienced at Shrilla. In
this I was not deceived; for one of the shepherds invited me to come
into his tent, and partake of some dates. This was one of those low
Foulah tents in which there is room just sufficient to sit upright,
and in which the family, the furniture, &c. seem huddled together
like so many articles in a chest. When I had crept upon my hands
and knees into this humble habitation, I found that it contained a
woman and three children; who, together with the shepherd and myself,
completely occupied the floor. A dish of boiled corn and dates was
produced, and the master of the family, as is customary in this part
of the country, first tasted it himself, and then desired me to follow
his example. Whilst I was eating, the children kept their eyes fixed
upon me; and no sooner did the shepherd pronounce the word _Nazarani_,
than they began to cry, and their mother crept slowly towards the
door, out of which she sprang like a greyhound, and was instantly
followed by her children. So frightened were they at the very name
of a Christian, that no entreaties could induce them to approach the
tent. Here I purchased some corn for my horse in exchange for some
brass buttons; and having thanked the shepherd for his hospitality,
struck again into the woods. At sunset, I came to a road that took the
direction for Bambarra, and resolved to follow it for the night; but
about eight o’clock, hearing some people coming from the southward,
I thought it prudent to hide myself among some thick bushes near the
road. As these thickets are generally full of wild beasts, I found my
situation rather unpleasant; sitting in the dark, holding my horse by
the nose, with both hands, to prevent him from neighing, and equally
afraid of the natives without, and the wild beasts within. My fears,
however, were soon dissipated; for the people, after looking round
the thicket, and perceiving nothing, went away; and I hastened to the
more open parts of the wood, where I pursued my journey E.S.E, until
past midnight; when the joyful cry of frogs induced me once more to
deviate a little from my route, in order to quench my thirst. Having
accomplished this, from a large pool of rain water, I sought for an
open place, with a single tree in the midst, under which I made my
bed for the night. I was disturbed by some wolves towards morning,
which induced me to set forward a little before day; and having
passed a small village called Wassalita, I came about ten o’clock
(July 5th,) to a Negro town called Wawra, which properly belongs to
Kaarta, but was at this time tributary to Mansong, King of Bambarra.




                              CHAPTER XV.                               

_The Author proceeds to Wassiboo — is joined by some fugitive
Kaartans, who accompany him in his Route through Bambarra. —
Discovers the Niger. — Some Account of Sego, the Capital of
Bambarra. — Mansong, the King, refuses to see the Author, but sends
him a Present. — Great Hospitality of a Negro Woman._


Wawra is a small town surrounded with high walls, and inhabited by a
mixture of Mandingoes and Foulahs. The inhabitants employ themselves
chiefly in cultivating corn, which they exchange with the Moors for
salt. Here, being in security from the Moors, and very much fatigued,
I resolved to rest myself; and meeting with a hearty welcome from the
Dooty, whose name was Flancharee, I laid myself down upon a bullock’s
hide, and slept soundly for about two hours. The curiosity of the
people would not allow me to sleep any longer. They had seen my
saddle and bridle, and were assembled in great number to learn who
I was, and whence I came. Some were of opinion that I was an Arab:
others insisted that I was some Moorish Sultan; and they continued to
debate the matter with such warmth, that the noise awoke me. The Dooty
(who had formerly been at Gambia) at last interposed in my behalf, and
assured them that I was certainly a white man; but he was convinced,
from my appearance, that I was a very poor one.

In the course of the day, several women, hearing that I was going to
Sego, came and begged me to inquire of Mansong, the king, what was
become of their children. One woman, in particular, told me that her
son’s name was Mamadee; that he was no Heathen, but prayed to God
morning and evening, and had been taken from her about three years ago,
by Mansong’s army; since which she had never heard of him. She said,
she often dreamed about him; and begged me, if I should see him, either
in Bambarra, or in my own country, to tell him, that his mother and
sister were still alive. In the afternoon, the Dooty examined the
contents of the leather bag, in which I had packed up my clothes;
but finding nothing that was worth taking, he returned it, and told
me to depart in the morning.

July 6th. It rained very much in the night, and at daylight I departed,
in company with a Negro, who was going to a town called Dingyee for
corn; but we had not proceeded above a mile, before the ass upon which
he rode kicked him off, and he returned, leaving me to prosecute the
journey by myself.

I reached Dingyee about noon; but the Dooty and most of the inhabitants
had gone into the fields to cultivate corn. An old Foulah, observing
me wandering about the town, desired me to come to his hut, where I
was well entertained; and the Dooty, when he returned, sent me some
victuals for myself, and corn for my horse.

July 7th. In the morning, when I was about to depart, my landlord,
with a great deal of diffidence, begged me to give him a lock of
my hair. He had been told, he said, that white men’s hair made a
saphie, that would give to the possessor all the knowledge of white
men. I had never before heard of so simple a mode of education,
but instantly complied with the request; and my landlord’s thirst
for learning was such, that, with cutting and pulling, he cropped one
side of my head pretty closely; and would have done the same with the
other, had I not signified my disapprobation, by putting on my hat,
and assuring him, that I wished to reserve some of this precious
merchandize for a future occasion.

I reached a small town called Wassiboo, about twelve o’clock,
where I was obliged to stop until an opportunity should offer of
procuring a guide to Satilé, which is distant a very long day’s
journey, through woods without any beaten path. I accordingly took up
my residence at the Dooty’s house, where I staid four days; during
which time I amused myself by going to the fields with the family to
plant corn. Cultivation is carried on here on a very extensive scale;
and, as the natives themselves express it, “hunger is never known.”
In cultivating the soil, the men and women work together. They use a
large sharp paddle, much superior to the paddle used in Gambia; but
they are obliged, for fear of the Moors, to carry their arms with them
to the field. The master, with the handle of his spear, marks the field
into regular plats, one of which is assigned to every three slaves.

On the evening of the 11th, eight of the fugitive Kaartans arrived at
Wassiboo. They had found it impossible to live under the tyrannical
government of the Moors, and were now going to transfer their
allegiance to the King of Bambarra. They offered to take me along
with them as far as Satilé; and I accepted the offer.

July 12th. At daybreak we set out, and travelled with uncommon
expedition until sunset: we stopped only twice in the course of the
day; once at a watering-place in the woods, and another time at the
ruins of a town, formerly belonging to Daisy, called _Illa-Compe_
(the corn town). When we arrived in the neighbourhood of Satilé, the
people who were employed in the corn fields, seeing so many horsemen,
took us for a party of Moors, and ran screaming away from us. The
whole town was instantly alarmed, and the slaves were seen, in every
direction, driving the cattle and horses towards the town. It was in
vain that one of our company galloped up to undeceive them: it only
frightened them the more; and when we arrived at the town, we found
the gates shut, and the people all under arms. After a long parley,
we were permitted to enter; and, as there was every appearance of a
heavy tornado, the Dooty allowed us to sleep in his baloon, and gave
us each a bullock’s hide for a bed.

July 13th. Early in the morning we again set forward. The roads were
wet and slippery, but the country was very beautiful, abounding with
rivulets, which were increased by the rain into rapid streams. About
ten o’clock, we came to the ruins of a village, which had been
destroyed by war about six months before; and in order to prevent
any town from being built there in future, the large Bentang tree,
under which the natives spent the day, had been burnt down; the
wells filled up; and every thing that could make the spot desirable
completely destroyed.

About noon, my horse was so much fatigued that I could not keep
up with my companions; I therefore dismounted, and desired them to
ride on, telling them, that I would follow as soon as my horse had
rested a little. But I found them unwilling to leave me: the lions,
they said, were very numerous in those parts, and though they might
not so readily attack a body of people, they would soon find out an
individual: it was therefore agreed, that one of the company should
stay with me, to assist in driving my horse, while the others passed
on to Galloo, to procure lodgings, and collect grass for the horses
before night. Accompanied by this worthy Negro, I drove my horse
before me until about four o’clock, when we came in sight of Galloo;
a considerable town, standing in a fertile and beautiful valley,
surrounded with high rocks.

As my companions had thoughts of settling in this neighbourhood,
they had a fine sheep given them by the Dooty; and I was fortunate
enough to procure plenty of corn for my horse. Here they blow upon
elephants’ teeth when they announce evening prayers, in the same
manner as at Kemmoo.

Early next morning, (July 14th,) having first returned many thanks
to our landlord for his hospitality, while my fellow-travellers
offered up their prayers that he might never want, we set forward;
and about three o’clock arrived at Moorja; a large town, famous for
its trade in salt, which the Moors bring here in great quantities,
to exchange for corn and cotton-cloth. As most of the people here
are Mahomedans, it is not allowed to the Kafirs to drink beer, which
they call _Neo-dollo_ (corn spirit,) except in certain houses. In
one of these I saw about twenty people sitting round large vessels of
this beer, with the greatest conviviality; many of them in a state of
intoxication. As corn is plentiful, the inhabitants are very liberal to
strangers: I believe we had as much corn and milk sent us by different
people, as would have been sufficient for three times our number;
and though we remained here two days, we experienced no diminution
of their hospitality.

On the morning of the 16th, we again set forward, accompanied by a
coffle of fourteen asses, loaded with salt, bound for Sansanding. The
road was particularly romantic, between two rocky hills; but the Moors
sometimes lie in wait here to plunder strangers. As soon as we had
reached the open country, the master of the salt coffle thanked us
for having staid with him so long, and now desired us to ride on. The
sun was almost set before we reached Datliboo. In the evening we had
a most tremendous tornado. The house in which we lodged, being flat
roofed, admitted the rain in streams; the floor was soon ankle deep,
the fire extinguished, and we were left to pass the night upon some
bundles of fire wood, that happened to lie in a corner.

July 17th. We departed from Datliboo; and about ten o’clock passed
a large coffle returning from Sego, with corn paddles, mats, and other
household utensils. At five o’clock we came to a large village, where
we intended to pass the night; but the Dooty would not receive us. When
we departed from this place, my horse was so much fatigued that I was
under the necessity of driving him, and it was dark before we reached
Fanimboo, a small village; the Dooty of which no sooner heard that I
was a white man, than he brought out three old muskets, and was much
disappointed when he was told that I could not repair them.

July 18th. We continued our journey; but, owing to a light supper
the preceding night, we felt ourselves rather hungry this morning,
and endeavoured to procure some corn at a village; but without
success. The towns were now more numerous, and the land that is not
employed in cultivation affords excellent pasturage for large herds of
cattle; but, owing to the great concourse of people daily going to and
returning from Sego, the inhabitants are less hospitable to strangers.

My horse becoming weaker and weaker every day, was now of very little
service to me: I was obliged to drive him before me for the greater
part of the day; and did not reach Geosorro until eight o’clock in
the evening. I found my companions wrangling with the Dooty, who had
absolutely refused to give or sell them any provisions; and as none of
us had tasted victuals for the last twenty-four hours, we were by no
means disposed to fast another day, if we could help it. But finding
our entreaties without effect, and being very much fatigued, I fell
asleep, from which I was awakened, about midnight, with the joyful
information “_kinne-nata_” (the victuals is come.) This made the
remainder of the night pass away pleasantly; and at daybreak, July
19th, we resumed our journey, proposing to stop at a village called
Doolinkeaboo, for the night following. My fellow-travellers, having
better horses than myself, soon left me; and I was walking barefoot,
driving my horse, when I was met by a coffle of slaves, about seventy
in number, coming from Sego. They were tied together by their necks
with thongs of a bullock’s hide, twisted like a rope; seven slaves
upon a thong; and a man with a musket between every seven. Many of the
slaves were ill conditioned, and a great number of them women. In the
rear came Sidi Mahomed’s servant, whom I remembered to have seen at
the camp of Benowm: he presently knew me, and told me that these slaves
were going to Morocco, by the way of Ludamar, and the Great Desert.

In the afternoon, as I approached Doolinkeaboo, I met about twenty
Moors on horseback, the owners of the slaves I had seen in the morning;
they were well armed with muskets, and were very inquisitive concerning
me, but not so rude as their countrymen generally are. From them I
learned that Sidi Mahomed was not at Sego, but had gone to Cancaba
for gold-dust.

When I arrived at Doolinkeaboo, I was informed that my
fellow-travellers had gone on; but my horse was so much fatigued that
I could not possibly proceed after them. The Dooty of the town, at my
request, gave me a draught of water, which is generally looked upon
as an earnest of greater hospitality; and I had no doubt of making
up for the toils of the day, by a good supper and a sound sleep:
unfortunately, I had neither one nor the other. The night was rainy
and tempestuous, and the Dooty limited his hospitality to the draught
of water.

July 20th. In the morning, I endeavoured, both by entreaties and
threats, to procure some victuals from the Dooty, but in vain. I even
begged some corn from one of his female slaves, as she was washing
it at the well, and had the mortification to be refused. However,
when the Dooty was gone to the fields, his wife sent me a handful
of meal, which I mixed with water, and drank for breakfast. About
eight o’clock, I departed from Doolinkeaboo, and at noon stopped a
few minutes at a large Korree; where I had some milk given me by the
Foulahs. And hearing that two Negroes were going from thence to Sego,
I was happy to have their company, and we set out immediately. About
four o’clock, we stopped at a small village, where one of the
Negroes met with an acquaintance, who invited us to a sort of public
entertainment, which was conducted with more than common propriety. A
dish, made of sour milk and meal, called _Sinkatoo_, and beer made
from their corn, was distributed with great liberality; and the
women were admitted into the society; a circumstance I had never
before observed in Africa. There was no compulsion; every one was at
liberty to drink as he pleased: they nodded to each other when about
to drink, and on setting down the calabash, commonly said _berka_,
(thank you). Both men and women, appeared to be somewhat intoxicated,
but they were far from being quarrelsome.

Departing from thence, we passed several large villages, where
I was constantly taken for a Moor, and became the subject of much
merriment to the Bambarrans; who, seeing me drive my horse before me,
laughed heartily at my appearance.—He has been at Mecca, says one;
you may see that by his clothes: another asked me if my horse was
sick; a third wished to purchase it, &c.; so that I believe the
very slaves were ashamed to be seen in my company. Just before it
was dark, we took up our lodging for the night at a small village,
where I procured some victuals for myself, and some corn for my horse,
at the moderate price of a button; and was told that I should see the
Niger (which the Negroes call Joliba, or _the great water_), early
the next day. The lions are here very numerous: the gates are shut
a little after sunset, and nobody allowed to go out. The thoughts
of seeing the Niger in the morning, and the troublesome buzzing
of musketoes, prevented me from shutting my eyes during the night;
and I had saddled my horse, and was in readiness before daylight;
but, on account of the wild beasts, we were obliged to wait until
the people were stirring, and the gates opened. This happened to be a
market-day at Sego, and the roads were every where filled with people,
carrying different articles to sell. We passed four large villages,
and at eight o’clock saw the smoke over Sego.

As we approached the town, I was fortunate enough to overtake the
fugitive Kaartans, to whose kindness I had been so much indebted
in my journey through Bambarra. They readily agreed to introduce
me to the king; and we rode together through some marshy ground,
where, as I was anxiously looking around for the river, one of them
called out, _geo affilli_, (see the water); and looking forwards,
I saw with infinite pleasure the great object of my mission; the
long sought for, majestic Niger, glittering to the morning sun,
as broad as the Thames at Westminster, and flowing slowly _to the
eastward_. I hastened to the brink, and, having drank of the water,
lifted up my fervent thanks in prayer, to the Great Ruler of all
things, for having thus far crowned my endeavours with success.

The circumstance of the Niger’s flowing towards the east, and its
collateral points, did not, however, excite my surprise; for although
I had left Europe in great hesitation on this subject, and rather
believed that it ran in the contrary direction, I had made such
frequent inquiries during my progress, concerning this river; and
received from Negroes of different nations, such clear and decisive
assurances that its general course was _towards the rising sun_, as
scarce left any doubt on my mind; and more especially as I knew that
Major Houghton, had collected similar information, in the same manner.

Sego, the capital of Bambarra, at which I had now arrived, consists,
properly speaking, of four distinct towns; two on the northern
bank of the Niger, called Sego Korro, and Sego Boo; and two on the
southern bank, called Sego Soo Korro, and Sego See Korro. They are
all surrounded with high mud-walls; the houses are built of clay,
of a square form, with flat roofs; some of them have two stories, and
many of them are whitewashed. Besides these buildings, Moorish mosques
are seen in every quarter; and the streets, though narrow, are broad
enough for every useful purpose, in a country where wheel carriages
are entirely unknown. From the best inquiries I could make, I have
reason to believe that Sego contains altogether about thirty thousand
inhabitants. The King of Bambarra constantly resides at Sego See Korro;
he employs a great many slaves in conveying people over the river, and
the money they receive (though the fare is only ten Kowrie shells for
each individual) furnishes a considerable revenue to the king, in the
course of a year. The canoes are of a singular construction, each of
them being formed of the trunks of two large trees, rendered concave,
and joined together, not side by side, but end ways; the junction being
exactly across the middle of the canoe: they are therefore very long
and disproportionably narrow, and have neither decks nor masts; they
are, however, very roomy; for I observed in one of them four horses,
and several people, crossing over the river. When we arrived at this
ferry, we found a great number waiting for a passage; they looked at
me with silent wonder, and I distinguished, with concern, many Moors
among them. There were three different places of embarkation, and the
ferrymen were very diligent and expeditious; but, from the crowd of
people, I could not immediately obtain a passage; and sat down upon
the bank of the river, to wait for a more favourable opportunity. The
view of this extensive city; the numerous canoes upon the river;
the crowded population, and the cultivated state of the surrounding
country, formed altogether a prospect of civilization and magnificence,
which I little expected to find in the bosom of Africa.

I waited more than two hours, without having an opportunity of
crossing the river; during which time the people who had crossed,
carried information to Mansong the King, that a white man was
waiting for a passage, and was coming to see him. He immediately sent
over one of his chief men, who informed me that the king could not
possibly see me, until he knew what had brought me into his country;
and that I must not presume to cross the river without the king’s
permission. He therefore advised me to lodge at a distant village,
to which he pointed, for the night; and said that in the morning he
would give me further instructions how to conduct myself. This was
very discouraging. However, as there was no remedy, I set off for the
village; where I found, to my great mortification, that no person
would admit me into his house. I was regarded with astonishment
and fear, and was obliged to sit all day without victuals, in the
shade of a tree; and the night threatened to be very uncomfortable,
for the wind rose, and there was great appearance of a heavy rain;
and the wild beasts are so very numerous in the neighbourhood, that
I should have been under the necessity of climbing up the tree,
and resting amongst the branches. About sunset, however, as I was
preparing to pass the night in this manner, and had turned my horse
loose, that he might graze at liberty, a woman, returning from the
labours of the field, stopped to observe me, and perceiving that I
was weary and dejected, inquired into my situation, which I briefly
explained to her; whereupon, with looks of great compassion, she took
up my saddle and bridle, and told me to follow her. Having conducted
me into her hut, she lighted up a lamp, spread a mat on the floor,
and told me I might remain there for the night. Finding that I was
very hungry, she said she would procure me something to eat. She
accordingly went out, and returned in a short time with a very fine
fish; which, having caused to be half broiled upon some embers, she
gave me for supper. The rites of hospitality being thus performed
towards a stranger in distress; my worthy benefactress (pointing to
the mat, and telling me I might sleep there without apprehension)
called to the female part of her family, who had stood gazing on me
all the while in fixed astonishment, to resume their task of spinning
cotton; in which they continued to employ themselves great part of
the night. They lightened their labour by songs, one of which was
composed extempore; for I was myself the subject of it. It was sung
by one of the young women, the rest joining in a sort of chorus. The
air was sweet and plaintive, and the words, literally translated,
were these.—“The winds roared, and the rains fell.—The poor
white man, faint and weary, came and sat under our tree.—He has no
mother to bring him milk; no wife to grind his corn. _Chorus_. Let
us pity the white man; no mother has he, &c. &c.” Trifling as this
recital may appear to the reader, to a person in my situation, the
circumstance was affecting in the highest degree. I was oppressed by
such unexpected kindness; and sleep fled from my eyes. In the morning I
presented my compassionate landlady with two of the four brass buttons
which remained on my waistcoat; the only recompence I could make her.

July 21st. I continued in the village all this day, in conversation
with the natives, who came in crowds to see me; but was rather uneasy
towards evening, to find that no message had arrived from the king;
the more so, as the people began to whisper, that Mansong had received
some very unfavourable accounts of me, from the Moors and Slatees
residing at Sego; who it seems were exceedingly suspicious concerning
the motives of my journey. I learnt that many consultations had been
held with the king, concerning my reception and disposal; and some
of the villagers frankly told me, that I had many enemies, and must
expect no favour.

July 22d. About eleven o’clock, a messenger arrived from the king;
but he gave me very little satisfaction. He inquired particularly
if I had brought any present; and seemed much disappointed when he
was told that I had been robbed of every thing by the Moors. When I
proposed to go along with him, he told me to stop until the afternoon,
when the king would send for me.

July 23d. In the afternoon, another messenger arrived from Mansong,
with a bag in his hands. He told me, it was the king’s pleasure
that I should depart forthwith from the vicinage of Sego; but that
Mansong, wishing to relieve a white man in distress, had sent me
five thousand Kowries,[13] to enable me to purchase provisions in
the course of my journey: the messenger added, that if my intentions
were really to proceed to Jenné, he had orders to accompany me as
a guide to Sansanding. I was at first puzzled to account for this
behaviour of the king; but, from the conversation I had with the guide,
I had afterward reason to believe, that Mansong would willingly have
admitted me into his presence at Sego; but was apprehensive he might
not be able to protect me, against the blind and inveterate malice of
the Moorish inhabitants. His conduct, therefore, was at once prudent
and liberal. The circumstances under which I made my appearance at
Sego, were undoubtedly such as might create in the mind of the king,
a well warranted suspicion that I wished to conceal the true object
of my journey. He argued, probably, as my guide argued; who, when he
was told, that I had come from a great distance, and through many
dangers, to behold the Joliba river, naturally inquired, if there
were no rivers in my own country, and whether one river was not like
another. Notwithstanding this, and in spite of the jealous machinations
of the Moors, this benevolent prince thought it sufficient, that
a white man was found in his dominions, in a condition of extreme
wretchedness; and that no other plea was necessary to entitle the
sufferer to his bounty.


[Footnote 13: Mention has already been made of these little shells,
(p. 27) which pass current as money, in many parts of the East-Indies,
as well as Africa. In Bambarra, and the adjacent countries, where the
necessaries of life are very cheap, one hundred of them would commonly
purchase a day’s provisions for myself, and corn for my horse. I
reckoned about two hundred and fifty Kowries, equal to one shilling.]




                              CHAPTER XVI.                              

_Departure from Sego, and Arrival at Kabba. — Description of the
Shea, or vegetable Butter Tree. — The Author and his Guide arrive
at Sansanding. Behaviour of the Moors at that Place. — The Author
pursues his Journey to the Eastward. — Incidents on the Road. —
Arrives at Modiboo, and proceeds for Kea; but obliged to leave his
Horse by the Way. — Embarks at Kea in a Fisherman’s Canoe for
Moorzan; is conveyed from thence across the Niger to Silla. —
Determines to proceed no further Eastward. — Some Account of the
further Course of the Niger, and the Towns in its Vicinage, towards
the East._


Being, in the manner that has been related, compelled to leave Sego,
I was conducted the same evening to a village about seven miles
to the eastward, with some of the inhabitants of which my guide
was acquainted, and by whom we were well received.[14] He was very
friendly and communicative, and spoke highly of the hospitality of
his countrymen; but withal told me, that if Jenné was the place
of my destination, which he seemed to have hitherto doubted, I had
undertaken an enterprize of greater danger than probably I was apprized
of; for, although the town of Jenné was, nominally, a part of the
King of Bambarra’s dominions, it was in fact, he said, a city of
the Moors; the leading part of the inhabitants being Bushreens, and
even the governor himself, though appointed by Mansong, of the same
sect. Thus was I in danger of falling a second time into the hands
of men who would consider it not only justifiable, but meritorious,
to destroy me; and this reflection was aggravated by the circumstance
that the danger increased, as I advanced in my journey; for I learned
that the places beyond Jenné were under the Moorish influence, in
a still greater degree than Jenné itself; and Tombuctoo, the great
object of my search, altogether in possession of that savage and
merciless people, who allow no Christian to live there. But I had
now advanced too far to think of returning to the westward, on such
vague and uncertain information, and determined to proceed; and being
accompanied by the guide, I departed from the village on the morning of
the 24th. About eight o’clock, we passed a large town called Kabba,
situated in the midst of a beautiful and highly cultivated country;
bearing a greater resemblance to the centre of England, than to what
I should have supposed had been the middle of Africa. The people were
every where employed in collecting the fruit of the Shea trees, from
which they prepare the vegetable butter, mentioned in former parts of
this work. These trees grow in great abundance all over this part of
Bambarra. They are not planted by the natives, but are found growing
naturally in the woods; and, in clearing wood land for cultivation,
every tree is cut down but the Shea. The tree itself, very much
resembles the American oak; and the fruit, from the kernel of which,
being first dried in the sun, the butter is prepared, by boiling the
kernel in water, has somewhat the appearance of a Spanish olive. The
kernel is enveloped in a sweet pulp, under a thin green rind; and
the butter produced from it, besides the advantage of its keeping the
whole year without salt; is whiter, firmer, and, to my palate, of a
richer flavour, than the best butter I ever tasted made from cows’
milk. The growth and preparation of this commodity, seem to be among
the first objects of African industry in this and the neighbouring
states; and it constitutes a main article of their inland commerce.

We passed, in the course of the day, a great many villages,
inhabited chiefly by fishermen; and in the evening about five
o’clock arrived at Sansanding; a very large town, containing, as
I was told, from eight to ten thousand inhabitants. This place is
much resorted to by the Moors, who bring salt from Beeroo, and beads
and coral from the Mediterranean, to exchange here for gold-dust,
and cotton-cloth. This cloth they sell to great advantage in Beeroo,
and other Moorish countries, where, on account of the want of rain,
no cotton is cultivated.

I desired my guide to conduct me to the house in which we were to
lodge, by the most private way possible. We accordingly rode along
between the town and the river, passing by a creek or harbour, in
which I observed twenty large canoes, most of them fully loaded, and
covered with mats, to prevent the rain from injuring the goods. As
we proceeded, three other canoes arrived, two with passengers, and
one with goods. I was happy to find, that all the Negro inhabitants
took me for a Moor; under which character I should probably have
passed unmolested, had not a Moor, who was sitting by the river side,
discovered the mistake, and setting up a loud exclamation, brought
together a number of his countrymen.

When I arrived at the house of Counti Mamadi, the Dooty of the town,
I was surrounded with hundreds of people, speaking a variety of
different dialects, all equally unintelligible to me. At length, by
the assistance of my guide, who acted as interpreter, I understood
that one of the spectators pretended to have seen me at one place,
and another at some other place; and a Moorish woman, absolutely
swore that she had kept my house three years at Gallam, on the river
Senegal. It was plain that they mistook me for some other person; and
I desired two of the most confident, to point towards the place where
they had seen me. They pointed due south; hence I think it probable
that they came from Cape Coast, where they might have seen many white
men. Their language was different from any I had yet heard. The Moors
now assembled in great number; with their usual arrogance, compelling
the Negroes to stand at a distance. They immediately began to question
me concerning my religion; but finding that I was not master of the
Arabic, they sent for two men, whom they call _Ilhuidi_ (Jews), in
hopes that they might be able to converse with me. These Jews, in
dress and appearance, very much resemble the Arabs; but though they
so far conform to the religion of Mahomet, as to recite, in public,
prayers from the Koran; they are but little respected by the Negroes;
and even the Moors themselves allowed, that though I was a Christian,
I was a better man than a Jew. They, however, insisted that, like the
Jews, I must conform so far as to repeat the Mahomedan prayers; and
when I attempted to wave the subject, by telling them that I could not
speak Arabic, one of them, a Shereef from Tuat, in the Great Desert,
started up and swore by the Prophet, that if I refused to go to the
mosque, he would be one that would assist in carrying me thither. And
there is no doubt but this threat would have been immediately executed,
had not my landlord interposed in my behalf. He told them, that I was
the king’s stranger, and he could not see me ill treated, whilst I
was under his protection. He therefore advised them to let me alone for
the night; assuring them, that, in the morning, I should be sent about
my business. This somewhat appeased their clamour; but they compelled
me to ascend a high seat, by the door of the mosque, in order that
every body might see me; for the people had assembled in such numbers
as to be quite ungovernable; climbing upon the houses, and squeezing
each other, like the spectators at an execution. Upon this seat I
remained until sunset, when I was conducted into a neat little hut,
with a small court before it; the door of which Counti Mamadi shut,
to prevent any person from disturbing me. But this precaution could
not exclude the Moors. They climbed over the top of the mud-wall,
and came in crowds into the court, in order, they said, to see me
_perform my evening devotions, and eat eggs_. The former of these
ceremonies, I did not think proper to comply with; but I told them
I had no objection to eat eggs, provided they would bring me eggs to
eat. My landlord immediately brought me seven hen’s eggs, and was
much surprised to find that I could not eat them raw; for it seems
to be a prevalent opinion among the inhabitants of the interior, that
Europeans subsist almost entirely on this diet. When I had succeeded,
in persuading my landlord that this opinion was without foundation,
and that I would gladly partake of any victuals which he might think
proper to send me; he ordered a sheep to be killed, and part of it to
be dressed for my supper. About midnight, when the Moors had left me,
he paid me a visit, and with much earnestness, desired me to write
him a saphie. “If a Moor’s saphie is good, (said this hospitable
old man), a white man’s must needs be better.” I readily furnished
him with one, possessed of all the virtues I could concentrate; for it
contained the Lord’s prayer. The pen with which it was written was
made of a reed; a little charcoal and gum-water made very tolerable
ink, and a thin board answered the purpose of paper.

July 25th. Early in the morning, before the Moors were assembled, I
departed from Sansanding, and slept the ensuing night at a small town
called Sibili; from whence, on the day following, I reached Nyara, a
large town at some distance from the river, where I halted the 27th,
to have my clothes washed, and recruit my horse. The Dooty there has
a very commodious house, flat roofed, and two stories high. He shewed
me some gunpowder of his own manufacturing: and pointed out as a great
curiosity, a little brown monkey, that was tied to a stake by the door,
telling me that it came from a far distant country, called Kong.

July 28th. I departed from Nyara, and reached Nyamee about noon. This
town is inhabited chiefly by Foulahs, from the kingdom of Masina. The
Dooty (I know not why), would not receive me, but civilly sent his
son on horseback, to conduct me to Modiboo; which he assured me was
at no great distance.

We rode nearly in a direct line, through the woods; but in general
went forwards with great circumspection. I observed that my guide
frequently stopped, and looked under the bushes. On inquiring the
reason of this caution, he told me that lions were very numerous in
that part of the country, and frequently attacked people travelling
through the woods. While he was speaking, my horse started, and
looking round, I observed a large animal of the camelopard kind,
standing at a little distance. The neck and fore legs were very long;
the head was furnished with two short black horns, turning backwards;
the tail, which reached down to the ham joint, had a tuft of hair
at the end. The animal was of a mouse colour; and it trotted away
from us in a very sluggish manner; moving its head from side to
side, to see if we were pursuing it. Shortly after this, as we were
crossing a large open plain, where there were a few scattered bushes,
my guide, who was a little way before me, wheeled his horse round in a
moment, calling out something in the Foulah language, which I did not
understand. I inquired in Mandingo what he meant; _Wara billi billi_,
a very large lion, said he; and made signs for me to ride away. But
my horse was too much fatigued: so we rode slowly past the bush,
from which the animal had given us the alarm. Not seeing any thing
myself, however, I thought my guide had been mistaken, when the Foulah
suddenly put his hand to his mouth, exclaiming, _Soubah an allahi_,
(God preserve us!) and to my great surprise, I then perceived a large
red lion, at a short distance from the bush, with his head couched
between his fore paws. I expected he would instantly spring upon me,
and instinctively pulled my feet from my stirrups, to throw myself
on the ground, that my horse might become the victim, rather than
myself. But it is probable the lion was not hungry; for he quietly
suffered us to pass, though we were fairly within his reach. My eyes
were so riveted upon this sovereign of the beasts, that I found it
impossible to remove them, until we were at a considerable distance. We
now took a circuitous route, through some swampy ground, to avoid
any more of these disagreeable rencounters. At sunset we arrived at
Modiboo; a delightful village on the banks of the Niger, commanding a
view of the river for many miles, both to the east and west. The small
green islands (the peaceful retreat of some industrious Foulahs, whose
cattle are here secure from the depredations of wild beasts), and the
majestic breadth of the river, which is here much larger than at Sego,
render the situation one of the most enchanting in the world. Here are
caught great plenty of fish, by means of long cotton nets, which the
natives make themselves; and use nearly in the same manner as nets are
used in Europe. I observed the head of a crocodile lying upon one of
the houses, which they told me had been killed by the shepherds, in
a swamp near the town. These animals are not uncommon in the Niger;
but I believe they are not oftentimes found dangerous. They are
of little account to the traveller, when compared with the amazing
swarms of musketoes, which rise from the swamps and creeks, in such
numbers as to harass even the most torpid of the natives; and as
my clothes were now almost worn to rags, I was but ill prepared to
resist their attacks. I usually passed the night, without shutting
my eyes, walking backwards and forwards, fanning myself with my hat;
their stings raised numerous blisters on my legs and arms; which,
together with the want of rest, made me very feverish and uneasy.

July 29th. Early in the morning, my landlord observing that I
was sickly, hurried me away; sending a servant with me as a guide
to Kea. But though I was little able to walk, my horse was still
less able to carry me; and about six miles to the east of Modiboo,
in crossing some rough clayey ground, he fell; and the united
strength of the guide and myself, could not place him again upon
his legs. I sat down for some time, beside this worn-out associate
of my adventures; but finding him still unable to rise, I took off
the saddle and bridle, and placed a quantity of grass before him. I
surveyed the poor animal, as he lay panting on the ground, with
sympathetic emotion; for I could not suppress the sad apprehension,
that I should myself, in a short time, lie down and perish in the same
manner, of fatigue and hunger. With this foreboding, I left my poor
horse; and with great reluctance followed my guide on foot, along
the bank of the river, until about noon; when we reached Kea, which
I found to be nothing more than a small fishing village. The Dooty,
a surly old man, who was sitting by the gate, received me very coolly;
and when I informed him of my situation, and begged his protection,
told me, with great indifference, that he paid very little attention
to fine speeches, and that I should not enter his house. My guide
remonstrated in my favour, but to no purpose; for the Dooty remained
inflexible in his determination. I knew not where to rest my wearied
limbs, but was happily relieved by a fishing canoe belonging to Silla,
which was at that moment coming down the river. The Dooty waved to the
fisherman to come near, and desired him to take charge of me as far as
Moorzan. The fisherman, after some hesitation, consented to carry me;
and I embarked in the canoe, in company with the fisherman, his wife,
and a boy. The Negro, who had conducted me from Modiboo, now left me;
I requested him to look to my horse on his return, and take care of
him if he was still alive, which he promised to do.

Departing from Kea, we proceeded about a mile down the river, when
the fisherman paddled the canoe to the bank, and desired me to jump
out. Having tied the canoe to a stake, he stripped off his clothes,
and dived for such a length of time, that I thought he had actually
drowned himself, and was surprised to see his wife behave with so
much indifference upon the occasion; but my fears were over when he
raised up his head astern of the canoe, and called for a rope. With
this rope he dived a second time; and then got into the canoe, and
ordered the boy to assist him in pulling. At length, they brought
up a large basket, about ten feet in diameter, containing two fine
fish, which the fisherman (after returning the basket into the water),
immediately carried ashore, and hid in the grass. We then went a little
farther down, and took up another basket, in which was one fish. The
fisherman now left us, to carry his prizes to some neighbouring market;
and the woman and boy proceeded with me in the canoe, down the river.

About four o’clock, we arrived at Moorzan, a fishing town on the
northern bank; from whence I was conveyed across the river to Silla,
a large town; where I remained until it was quite dark, under a
tree, surrounded by hundreds of people. But their language was very
different from the other parts of Bambarra; and I was informed that,
in my progress eastward, the Bambarra tongue was but little understood,
and that when I reached Jenné, I should find that the majority of
the inhabitants spoke a different language, called _Jenné Kummo_
by the Negroes; and _Kalam Soudan_, by the Moors.

With a great deal of entreaty, the Dooty allowed me to come into his
baloon, to avoid the rain; but the place was very damp, and I had
a smart paroxysm of fever, during the night. Worn down by sickness,
exhausted with hunger and fatigue; half naked, and without any article
of value, by which I might procure provisions, clothes, or lodging;
I began to reflect seriously on my situation. I was now convinced,
by painful experience, that the obstacles to my further progress were
insurmountable. The tropical rains were already set in, with all their
violence; the rice grounds and swamps, were every where overflowed;
and, in a few days more, travelling of every kind, unless by water,
would be completely obstructed. The Kowries which remained of the King
of Bambarra’s present, were not sufficient to enable me to hire a
canoe for any great distance; and I had but little hopes of subsisting
by charity, in a country where the Moors have such influence. But
above all, I perceived that I was advancing, more and more, within
the power of those merciless fanatics; and from my reception both at
Sego and Sansanding, I was apprehensive that, in attempting to reach
even Jenné (unless under the protection of some man of consequence
amongst them, which I had no means of obtaining), I should sacrifice
my life to no purpose; for my discoveries would perish with me. The
prospect either way was gloomy. In returning to the Gambia, a journey
on foot of many hundred miles, presented itself to my contemplation,
through regions and countries unknown. Nevertheless, this seemed to be
the only alternative; for I saw inevitable destruction in attempting
to proceed to the eastward. With this conviction on my mind, I hope
my readers will acknowledge, that I did right in going no farther. I
had made every effort to execute my mission in its fullest extent,
which prudence could justify. Had there been the most distant prospect
of a successful termination, neither the unavoidable hardships of
the journey, nor the dangers of a second captivity, should have
forced me to desist. This, however, necessity compelled me to do;
and whatever may be the opinion of my general readers on this point,
it affords me inexpressible satisfaction, that my honourable employers
have been pleased, since my return, to express their full approbation
of my conduct.

Having thus brought my mind, after much doubt and perplexity, to
a determination to return westward; I thought it incumbent on me,
before I left Silla, to collect from the Moorish and Negro traders,
all the information I could, concerning the further course of the Niger
eastward; and the situation and extent of the kingdoms in its vicinage;
and the following few notices I received from such various quarters,
as induce me to think they are authentic.

Two short days’ journey to the eastward of Silla, is the town of
Jenné, which is situated on a small island in the river; and is
said to contain a greater number of inhabitants than Sego itself,
or any other town in Bambarra. At the distance of two days more,
the river spreads into a considerable lake, called _Dibbie_ (or the
dark lake), concerning the extent of which, all the information I
could obtain was, that in crossing it, from west to east, the canoes
lose sight of land one whole day. From this lake, the water issues
in many different streams, which terminate in two large branches,
one whereof flows towards the north-east, and the other to the east;
but these branches join at Kabra, which is one day’s journey to the
southward of Tombuctoo, and is the port or shipping-place of that
city. The tract of land which the two streams encircle, is called
Jinbala, and is inhabited by Negroes; and the whole distance, by land,
from Jenné to Tombuctoo, is twelve days’ journey.

From Kabra, at the distance of eleven days’ journey, down the
stream, the river passes to the southward of Houssa, which is two
days’ journey distant from the river. Of the further progress of
this great river, and its final exit, all the natives with whom I
conversed, seem to be entirely ignorant. Their commercial pursuits
seldom induce them to travel further than the cities of Tombuctoo and
Houssa; and as the sole object of those journies is the acquirement
of wealth, they pay but little attention to the course of rivers,
or the geography of countries. It is, however, highly probable that
the Niger affords a safe and easy communication between very remote
nations. All my informants agreed, that many of the Negro merchants who
arrive at Tombuctoo and Houssa, from the eastward, speak a different
language from that of Bambarra, or any other kingdom with which they
are acquainted. But even these merchants, it would seem, are ignorant
of the termination of the river, for such of them as can speak Arabic,
describe the amazing length of its course in very general terms;
saying only, that they believe _it runs to the world’s end_.

The names of many kingdoms to the eastward of Houssa, are familiar
to the inhabitants of Bambarra. I was shewn quivers and arrows of
very curious workmanship, which I was informed came from the kingdom
of Kassina.

On the northern bank of the Niger, at a short distance from Silla,
is the kingdom of Masina, which is inhabited by Foulahs. They employ
themselves there, as in other places, chiefly in pasturage, and
pay an annual tribute to the King of Bambarra, for the lands which
they occupy.

To the north-east of Masina, is situated the kingdom of Tombuctoo,
the great object of European research; the capital of this kingdom
being one of the principal marts for that extensive commerce which the
Moors carry on with the Negroes. The hopes of acquiring wealth in this
pursuit, and zeal for propagating their religion, have filled this
extensive city with Moors and Mahomedan converts; the king himself,
and all the chief officers of state are Moors; and they are said to
be more severe and intolerant in their principles than any other
of the Moorish tribes in this part of Africa. I was informed by a
venerable old Negro, that when he first visited Tombuctoo, he took
up his lodging at a sort of public inn, the landlord of which, when
he conducted him into his hut, spread a mat on the floor, and laid
a rope upon it; saying “if you are a Mussulman, you are my friend,
sit down; but if you are a Kafir, you are my slave; and with this rope,
I will lead you to market.” The present King of Tombuctoo is named
_Abu Abrahima_; he is reported to possess immense riches. His wives
and concubines are said to be clothed in silk, and the chief officers
of state live in considerable splendour. The whole expence of his
government is defrayed, as I was told, by a tax upon merchandize,
which is collected at the gates of the city.

The city of Houssa, (the capital of a large kingdom of the same name,
situated to the eastward of Tombuctoo,) is another great mart for
Moorish commerce. I conversed with many merchants who had visited
that city; and they all agreed that it is larger, and more populous,
than Tombuctoo. The trade, police, and government, are nearly the
same in both; but in Houssa, the Negroes are in greater proportion
to the Moors, and have some share in the government.

Concerning the small kingdom of Jinbala, I was not able to collect much
information. The soil is said to be remarkably fertile, and the whole
country so full of creeks and swamps, that the Moors have hitherto been
baffled in every attempt to subdue it. The inhabitants are Negroes, and
some of them are said to live in considerable affluence, particularly
those near the capital; which is a resting-place for such merchants
as transport goods from Tombuctoo to the western parts of Africa.

To the southward of Jinbala, is situated the Negro kingdom of Gotto,
which is said to be of great extent. It was formerly divided into
a number of petty states, which were governed by their own chiefs;
but their private quarrels invited invasion from the neighbouring
kingdoms. At length a politic chief, of the name of Moossee, had
address enough to make them unite in hostilities against Bambarra;
and on this occasion he was unanimously chosen general; the different
chiefs consenting for a time to act under his command. Moossee
immediately dispatched a fleet of canoes, loaded with provisions, from
the banks of the lake Dibbie up the Niger, towards Jenné, and with
the whole of his army pushed forwards into Bambarra. He arrived on
the bank of the Niger opposite to Jenné, before the townspeople had
the smallest intimation of his approach; his fleet of canoes joined
him the same day, and having landed the provisions, he embarked part
of his army, and in the night took Jenné by storm. This event so
terrified the King of Bambarra, that he sent messengers to sue for
peace, and in order to obtain it, consented to deliver to Moossee a
certain number of slaves every year; and return every thing that had
been taken from the inhabitants of Gotto. Moossee, thus triumphant,
returned to Gotto, where he was declared king, and the capital of
the country is called by his name.

On the west of Gotto, is the kingdom of Baedoo, which was conquered by
the present King of Bambarra about seven years ago, and has continued
tributary to him ever since.

West of Baedoo, is Maniana; the inhabitants of which, according to
the best information I was able to collect, are cruel and ferocious;
carrying their resentment towards their enemies, so far as never
to give quarter; and even to indulge themselves with unnatural and
disgusting banquets of human flesh.

I am well aware that the accounts which the Negroes give of their
enemies, ought to be received with great caution; but I heard the
same account in so many different kingdoms, and from such variety
of people, whose veracity I had no occasion to suspect, that I am
disposed to allow it some degree of credit. The inhabitants of
Bambarra, in the course of a long and bloody war, must have had
frequent opportunities of satisfying themselves as to the fact:
and if the report had been entirely without foundation, I cannot
conceive why the term _Ma dummulo_, (man eaters), should be applied
exclusively to the inhabitants of Maniana.


[Footnote 14: I should have before observed, that I found the language
of Bambarra, a sort of corrupted Mandingo. After a little practice,
I understood, and spoke it without difficulty.]




                             CHAPTER XVII.                              

_The Author returns Westward — arrives at Modiboo, and recovers
his Horse — finds great Difficulty in travelling, in consequence of
the Rains, and the overflowing of the River; — is informed that the
King of Bambarra had sent Persons to apprehend him: — avoids Sego,
and prosecutes his Journey along the Banks of the Niger. — Incidents
on the Road. — Cruelties attendant on African Wars. — The Author
crosses the River Frina, and arrives at Taffara._


Having, for the reasons assigned in the last Chapter, determined
to proceed no farther eastward than Silla, I acquainted the Dooty
with my intention of returning to Sego, proposing to travel along
the southern side of the river; but he informed me, that, from the
number of creeks and swamps on that side, it was impossible to travel
by any other route than along the northern bank; and even that route,
he said, would soon be impassable, on account of the overflowing of the
river. However, as he commended my determination to return westward,
he agreed to speak to some one of the fishermen to carry me over to
Moorzan. I accordingly stepped into a canoe about eight o’clock
in the morning of July 30th, and in about an hour was landed at
Moorzan. At this place I hired a canoe for sixty Kowries, and in the
afternoon arrived at Kea; where, for forty Kowries more, the Dooty
permitted me to sleep in the same hut with one of his slaves. This
poor Negro, perceiving that I was sickly, and that my clothes were
very ragged, humanely lent me a large cloth to cover me for the night.

July 31st. The Dooty’s brother being going to Modiboo, I embraced
the opportunity of accompanying him thither, there being no beaten
road. He promised to carry my saddle, which I had left at Kea when
my horse fell down in the woods, as I now proposed to present it to
the King of Bambarra.

We departed from Kea at eight o’clock, and about a mile to the
westward observed, on the bank of the river, a great number of
earthen jars, piled up together. They were very neatly formed,
but not glazed; and were evidently of that sort of pottery which is
manufactured at Downie (a town to the west of Tombuctoo), and sold
to great advantage in different parts of Bambarra. As we approached
towards the jars, my companion plucked up a large handful of herbage,
and threw it upon them; making signs for me to do the same, which I
did. He then, with great seriousness, told me that these jars belonged
to some supernatural power; that they were found in their present
situation about two years ago; and as no person had claimed them,
every traveller as he passed them, from respect to the invisible
proprietor, threw some grass, or the branch of a tree, upon the heap,
to defend the jars from the rain.

Thus conversing, we travelled in the most friendly manner until,
unfortunately, we perceived the footsteps of a lion, quite fresh
in the mud, near the river side. My companion now proceeded with
great circumspection; and at last, coming to some thick underwood, he
insisted that I should walk before him. I endeavoured to excuse myself,
by alleging that I did not know the road; but he obstinately persisted;
and after a few high words and menacing looks, threw down the saddle
and went away. This very much disconcerted me; but as I had given
up all hopes of obtaining a horse, I could not think of encumbering
myself with the saddle; and taking off the stirrups and girths,
I threw the saddle into the river. The Negro no sooner saw me throw
the saddle into the water, than he came running from among the bushes
where he had concealed himself, jumped into the river, and by help of
his spear brought out the saddle, and ran away with it. I continued
my course along the bank; but as the wood was remarkably thick, and I
had reason to believe that a lion was at no great distance, I became
much alarmed, and took a long circuit through the bushes to avoid him.

About four in the afternoon I reached Modiboo, where I found my
saddle. The guide, who had got there before me, being afraid that I
should inform the king of his conduct, had brought the saddle with
him in a canoe.

While I was conversing with the Dooty, and remonstrating against the
guide for having left me in such a situation, I heard a horse neigh
in one of the huts; and the Dooty inquired, with a smile, if I knew
who was speaking to me? He explained himself, by telling me that my
horse was still alive, and somewhat recovered from his fatigue; but
he insisted that I should take him along with me; adding, that he had
once kept a Moor’s horse for four months, and when the horse had
recovered and got into good condition, the Moor returned and claimed
it, and refused to give him any reward for his trouble.

August 1st. I departed from Modiboo, driving my horse before me; and
in the afternoon reached Nyamee, where I remained three days; during
which time it rained without intermission, and with such violence,
that no person could venture out of doors.

Aug. 5th. I departed from Nyamee; but the country was so deluged,
that I was frequently in danger of losing the road, and had to wade
across the savannahs for miles together, knee deep in water. Even
the corn ground, which is the driest land in the country, was so
completely flooded, that my horse twice stuck fast in the mud, and
was not got out without the greatest difficulty.

In the evening of the same day, I arrived at Nyara, where I was well
received by the Dooty; and as the 6th was rainy, I did not depart until
the morning of the 7th; but the water had swelled to such a height,
that in many places the road was scarcely passable; and though I waded
breast deep across the swamps, I could only reach a small village
called Nemaboo, where, however, for an hundred Kowries, I procured
from some Foulahs, plenty of corn for my horse, and milk for myself.

Aug. 8th. The difficulties I had experienced the day before, made me
anxious to engage a fellow-traveller; particularly as I was assured,
that, in the course of a few days, the country would be so completely
overflowed, as to render the road utterly impassable; but though
I offered two hundred Kowries for a guide, nobody would accompany
me. However, on the morning following, (August 9th,) a Moor and
his wife, riding upon two bullocks, and bound for Sego with salt,
passed the village, and agreed to take me along with them; but I
found them of little service; for they were wholly unacquainted
with the road, and being accustomed to a sandy soil, were very
bad travellers. Instead of wading before the bullocks, to feel if
the ground was solid, the woman boldly entered the first swamp,
riding upon the top of the load; but when she had proceeded about
two hundred yards, the bullock sunk into a hole, and threw both the
load and herself among the reeds. The frightened husband stood for
some time seemingly petrified with horror, and suffered his wife to
be almost drowned before he went to her assistance.

About sunset we reached Sibity; but the Dooty received me very
coolly: and when I solicited for a guide to Sansanding, he told me
his people were otherwise employed. I was shewn into a damp old hut,
where I passed a very uncomfortable night; for when the walls of the
huts are softened by the rain, they frequently become too weak to
support the weight of the roof. I heard three huts fall during the
night, and was apprehensive that the hut I lodged in would be the
fourth. In the morning, as I went to pull some grass for my horse,
I counted fourteen huts which had fallen in this manner, since the
commencement of the rainy season.

It continued to rain with great violence all the 10th; and as the
Dooty refused to give me any provisions, I purchased some corn,
which I divided with my horse.

Aug. 11th. The Dooty compelled me to depart from the town, and I set
out for Sansanding, without any great hopes of faring better there
than I had done at Sibity; for I learned, from people who came to
visit me, that a report prevailed, and was universally believed, that
I had come to Bambarra as a spy; and as Mansong had not admitted me
into his presence, the Dooties of the different towns were at liberty
to treat me in what manner they pleased. From repeatedly hearing the
same story, I had no doubt of the truth of it; but as there was no
alternative, I determined to proceed, and a little before sunset I
arrived at Sansanding. My reception was what I expected. Counti Mamadi,
who had been so kind to me formerly, scarcely gave me welcome. Every
one wished to shun me; and my landlord sent a person to inform me,
that a very unfavourable report was received from Sego concerning
me, and that he wished me to depart early in the morning. About ten
o’clock at night Counti Mamadi himself came privately to me, and
informed me, that Mansong had dispatched a canoe to Jenné to bring
me back; and he was afraid I should find great difficulty in going to
the west country. He advised me, therefore, to depart from Sansanding
before daybreak; and cautioned me against stopping at Diggani, or
any town near Sego.

Aug. 12th. I departed from Sansanding, and reached Kabba in the
afternoon. As I approached the town, I was surprised to see several
people assembled at the gate; one of whom, as I advanced, came running
towards me, and taking my horse by the bridle, led me round the walls
of the town; and then pointing to the west, told me to go along, or
it would fare worse with me. It was in vain that I represented the
danger of being benighted in the woods, exposed to the inclemency of
the weather, and the fury of wild beasts. “Go along,” was all
the answer; and a number of people coming up, and urging me in the
same manner, with great earnestness, I suspected that some of the
king’s messengers, who were sent in search of me, were in the town;
and that these Negroes, from mere kindness, conducted me past it, with
a view to facilitate my escape. I accordingly took the road for Sego,
with the uncomfortable prospect of passing the night on the branches
of a tree. After travelling about three miles, I came to a small
village near the road. The Dooty was splitting sticks by the gate;
but I found I could have no admittance; and when I attempted to enter,
he jumped up, and with the stick he held in his hand threatened to
strike me off the horse, if I presumed to advance another step.

At a little distance from this village (and farther from the road),
is another small one. I conjectured, that being rather out of the
common route, the inhabitants might have fewer objections to give
me house room for the night; and having crossed some corn fields,
I sat down under a tree by the well. Two or three women came to draw
water; and one of them perceiving I was a stranger, inquired whither
I was going. I told her I was going for Sego, but being benighted on
the road, I wished to stay at the village until morning; and begged
she would acquaint the Dooty with my situation. In a little time the
Dooty sent for me, and permitted me to sleep in a large baloon, in
one corner of which was constructed a kiln for drying the fruit of
the Shea trees: it contained about half a cartload of fruit, under
which was kept up a clear wood fire. I was informed, that in three
days the fruit would be ready for pounding and boiling; and that the
butter thus manufactured, is preferable to that which is prepared
from fruit dried in the sun; especially in the rainy season; when the
process by insolation is always tedious, and oftentimes ineffectual.

Aug. 13. About ten o’clock I reached a small village within half
a mile of Sego, where I endeavoured, but in vain, to procure some
provisions. Every one seemed anxious to avoid me; and I could plainly
perceive, by the looks and behaviour of the inhabitants, that some
very unfavourable accounts had been circulated concerning me. I was
again informed, that Mansong had sent people to apprehend me; and
the Dooty’s son told me I had no time to lose, if I wished to get
safe out of Bambarra. I now fully saw the danger of my situation, and
determined to avoid Sego altogether. I accordingly mounted my horse,
and taking the road for Diggani, travelled as fast as I could, until
I was out of sight of the villagers, when I struck to the westward,
through high grass and swampy ground. About noon, I stopped under a
tree, to consider what course to take; for I had now no doubt that the
Moors and Slatees had misinformed the king respecting the object of my
mission, and that people were absolutely in search of me, to convey
me a prisoner to Sego. Sometimes I had thoughts of swimming my horse
across the Niger, and going to the southward, for Cape Coast; but
reflecting that I had ten days to travel before I should reach Kong,
and afterward an extensive country to traverse, inhabited by various
nations, with whose language and manners I was totally unacquainted,
I relinquished this scheme, and judged, that I should better answer the
purpose of my mission, by proceeding to the westward along the Niger,
endeavouring to ascertain how far the river was navigable in that
direction. Having resolved upon this course, I proceeded accordingly;
and a little before sunset arrived at a Foulah village called Sooboo,
where, for two hundred Kowries, I procured lodging for the night.

Aug. 14th. I continued my course along the bank of the river, through
a populous and well cultivated country. I passed a walled town called
Kamalia,[15] without stopping; and at noon rode through a large town
called Samee, where there happened to be a market, and a number
of people assembled in an open place in the middle of the town,
selling cattle, cloth, corn, &c. I rode through the midst of them
without being much observed; every one taking me for a Moor. In the
afternoon I arrived at a small village called Binni, where I agreed
with the Dooty’s son, for one hundred Kowries, to allow me to stay
for the night; but when the Dooty returned, he insisted that I should
instantly leave the place; and if his wife and son had not interceded
for me, I must have complied.

Aug. 15th. About nine o’clock I passed a large town called Sai,
which very much excited my curiosity. It is completely surrounded
by two very deep trenches, at about two hundred yards distant from
the walls. On the top of the trenches are a number of square towers;
and the whole has the appearance of a regular fortification. Inquiring
into the origin of this extraordinary entrenchment, I learned from two
of the townspeople the following particulars; which, if true, furnish
a mournful picture of the enormities of African wars. About fifteen
years ago, when the present King of Bambarra’s father desolated
Maniana, the Dooty of Sai had two sons slain in battle, fighting in the
king’s cause. He had a third son living; and when the king demanded a
further reinforcement of men, and this youth among the rest, the Dooty
refused to send him. This conduct so enraged the king, that when he
returned from Maniana, about the beginning of the rainy season, and
found the Dooty protected by the inhabitants, he sat down before Sai,
with his army, and surrounded the town with the trenches I had now
seen. After a siege of two months, the townspeople became involved in
all the horrors of famine; and whilst the king’s army were feasting,
in their trenches, they saw with pleasure, the miserable inhabitants
of Sai devour the leaves and bark of the Bentang tree that stood in
the middle of the town. Finding, however, that the besieged would
sooner perish than surrender, the king had recourse to treachery. He
promised, that if they would open the gates, no person should be put
to death, nor suffer any injury, but the Dooty alone. The poor old man
determined to sacrifice himself, for the sake of his fellow-citizens,
and immediately walked over to the king’s army, where he was put
to death. His son, in attempting to escape, was caught and massacred
in the trenches; and the rest of the townspeople were carried away
captives, and sold as slaves to the different Negro traders.

About noon I came to the village of Kaimoo, situated upon the bank of
the river; and as the corn I had purchased at Sibili, was exhausted,
I endeavoured to purchase a fresh supply; but was informed that corn
was become very scarce all over the country; and though I offered
fifty Kowries for a small quantity, no person would sell me any. As
I was about to depart, however, one of the villagers (who probably
mistook me for some Moorish shereef) brought me some as a present; only
desiring me in return, to bestow my blessing upon him; which I did in
plain English, and he received it with a thousand acknowledgments. Of
this present I made my dinner; and it was the third successive day
that I had subsisted entirely upon raw corn.

In the evening I arrived at a small village called Song, the surly
inhabitants of which would not receive me, nor so much as permit me to
enter the gate; but as lions were very numerous in this neighbourhood,
and I had frequently, in the course of the day, observed the impression
of their feet on the road, I resolved to stay in the vicinity of the
village. Having collected some grass for my horse, I accordingly lay
down under a tree by the gate. About ten o’clock I heard the hollow
roar of a lion at no great distance, and attempted to open the gate;
but the people from within told me, that no person must attempt to
enter the gate without the Dooty’s permission. I begged them to
inform the Dooty that a lion was approaching the village, and I hoped
he would allow me to come within the gate. I waited for an answer to
this message with great anxiety; for the lion kept prouling round the
village, and once advanced so very near me, that I heard him rustling
among the grass, and climbed the tree for safety. About midnight
the Dooty with some of his people, opened the gate, and desired me
to come in. They were convinced, they said, that I was not a Moor;
for no Moor ever waited any time at the gate of a village, without
cursing the inhabitants.

Aug. 16th. About ten o’clock I passed a considerable town, with a
mosque, called Jabbee. Here the country begins to rise into hills,
and I could see the summits of high mountains to the westward. I
had very disagreeable travelling all this day, on account of the
swampiness of the roads; for the river was now risen to such a
height, as to overflow great part of the flat land on both sides;
and from the muddiness of the water, it was difficult to discern its
depth. In crossing one of these swamps, a little to the westward
of a town called Gangu, my horse being up to the belly in water,
slipt suddenly into a deep pit, and was almost drowned before he
could disengage his feet from the stiff clay at the bottom. Indeed,
both the horse and his rider were so completely covered with mud,
that in passing the village of Callimana, the people compared us to
two dirty elephants. About noon I stopped at a small village near
Yamina, where I purchased some corn, and dried my papers and clothes.

The town of Yamina, at a distance, has a very fine appearance. It
covers nearly the same extent of ground as Sansanding; but having
been plundered by Daisy, King of Kaarta, about four years ago, it has
not yet resumed its former prosperity; nearly one half of the town
being nothing but a heap of ruins: however, it is still a considerable
place, and is so much frequented by the Moors, that I did not think it
safe to lodge in it; but, in order to satisfy myself respecting its
population and extent, I resolved to ride through it; in doing which
I observed a great many Moors sitting upon the Bentangs, and other
places of public resort. Every body looked at me with astonishment;
but as I rode briskly along, they had no time to ask questions.

I arrived in the evening at Farra, a walled village; where, without
much difficulty, I procured a lodging for the night.

Aug. 17th. Early in the morning I pursued my journey, and at eight
o’clock passed a considerable town called Balaba; after which the
road quits the plain, and stretches along the side of the hill. I
passed in the course of this day, the ruins of three towns; the
inhabitants of which were all carried away by Daisy, King of Kaarta,
on the same day that he took and plundered Yamina. Near one of these
ruins I climbed a tamarind tree, but found the fruit quite green and
sour; and the prospect of the country was by no means inviting; for
the high grass and bushes seemed completely to obstruct the road, and
the low lands were all so flooded by the river, that the Niger had the
appearance of an extensive lake. In the evening I arrived at Kanika,
where the Dooty, who was sitting upon an elephant’s hide at the
gate, received me kindly; and gave me for supper, some milk and meal;
which I considered (as to a person in my situation it really was)
a very great luxury.

Aug. 18th. By mistake, I took the wrong road, and did not discover
my error until I had travelled near four miles; when coming to an
eminence, I observed the Niger considerably to the left. Directing
my course towards it, I travelled through long grass and bushes,
with great difficulty, until two o’clock in the afternoon; when
I came to a comparatively small, but very rapid river; which I took
at first for a creek, or one of the streams of the Niger. However,
after I had examined it with more attention, I was convinced that
it was a distinct river; and as the road evidently crossed it (for
I could see the pathway on the opposite side), I sat down upon the
bank, in hopes that some traveller might arrive, who would give me
the necessary information concerning the fording place; for the banks
were so covered with reeds and bushes, that it would have been almost
impossible to land on the other side, except at the pathway; which,
on account of the rapidity of the stream, it seemed very difficult
to reach. No traveller, however, arriving, and there being a great
appearance of rain, I examined the grass and bushes, for some way up
the bank, and determined upon entering the river considerably above
the pathway, in order to reach the other side before the stream had
swept me too far down. With this view I fastened my clothes upon the
saddle, and was standing up to the neck in water, pulling my horse by
the bridle to make him follow me, when a man came accidentally to the
place, and seeing me in the water, called to me with great vehemence to
come out. The alligators, he said, would devour both me and my horse,
if we attempted to swim over. When I had got out, the stranger, who
had never before seen a European, seemed wonderfully surprised. He
twice put his hand to his mouth, exclaiming in a low tone of voice,
“God preserve me! who is this?” but when he heard me speak the
Bambarra tongue, and found that I was going the same way as himself,
he promised to assist me in crossing the river; the name of which
he told me was Frina. He then went a little way along the bank, and
called to some person, who answered from the other side. In a short
time, a canoe with two boys, came paddling from among the reeds: these
boys agreed for fifty Kowries, to transport me and my horse over the
river, which was effected without much difficulty; and I arrived in
the evening at Taffara, a walled town; and soon discovered that the
language of the natives was improved, from the corrupted dialect of
Bambarra, to the pure Mandingo.


[Footnote 15: There is another town of this name, hereafter to be
mentioned.]




                             CHAPTER XVIII.                             

_Inhospitable Reception at Taffara. — A Negro Funeral at Sooha. —
The Author continues his Route through several Villages along the
Banks of the Niger, until he comes to Koolikorro. — Supports himself
by writing_ Saphies — _reaches Maraboo — loses the Road; and
after many Difficulties arrives at Bammakoo. — Takes the Road for
Sibidooloo — meets with great Kindness at a Village called Kooma;
— is afterwards robbed, stripped, and plundered by Banditti. —
The Author’s Resource and Consolation under exquisite Distress. —
He arrives in Safety at Sibidooloo._


On my arrival at Taffara, I inquired for the Dooty, but was informed
that he had died a few days before my arrival, and that there was,
at that moment, a meeting of the chief men for electing another;
there being some dispute about the succession. It was probably
owing to this unsettled state of the town, that I experienced such
a want of hospitality in it; for though I informed the inhabitants
that I should only remain with them for one night, and assured
them that Mansong had given me some Kowries to pay for my lodging,
yet no person invited me to come in; and I was forced to sit alone,
under the Bentang tree, exposed to the rain and wind of a tornado,
which lasted with great violence until midnight. At this time the
stranger, who had assisted me in crossing the river, paid me a visit,
and observing that I had not found a lodging, invited me to take
part of his supper, which he had brought to the door of his hut; for,
being a guest himself, he could not, without his landlord’s consent,
invite me to come in. After this, I slept upon some wet grass in the
corner of a court. My horse fared still worse than myself; the corn
I had purchased being all expended, and I could not procure a supply.

Aug. 20. I passed the town of Jaba, and stopped a few minutes at a
village called Somino, where I begged and obtained some coarse food,
which the natives prepare from the husks of corn, and call _Boo_. About
two o’clock I came to the village of Sooha, and endeavoured to
purchase some corn from the Dooty, who was sitting by the gate; but
without success. I then requested a little food by way of charity, but
was told he had none to spare. Whilst I was examining the countenance
of this inhospitable old man, and endeavouring to find out the cause
of the sullen discontent, which was visible in his eye, he called
to a slave who was working in the corn-field at a little distance,
and ordered him to bring his paddle along with him. The Dooty then
told him to dig a hole in the ground; pointing to a spot at no
great distance. The slave, with his paddle, began to dig a pit in
the earth; and the Dooty, who appeared to be a man of a very fretful
disposition, kept muttering and talking to himself until the pit was
almost finished, when he repeatedly pronounced the words _dankatoo_
(good for nothing); _jankra lemen_ (a real plague); which expressions I
thought could be applied to nobody but myself; and as the pit had very
much the appearance of a grave, I thought it prudent to mount my horse,
and was about to decamp, when the slave, who had before gone into the
village, to my surprise, returned with the corpse of a boy about nine
or ten years of age, quite naked. The Negro carried the body by a leg
and an arm, and threw it into the pit with a savage indifference,
which I had never before seen. As he covered the body with earth,
the Dooty often expressed himself, _naphula attiniata_ (money lost);
whence I concluded that the boy had been one of his slaves.

Departing from this shocking scene, I travelled by the side of the
river until sunset, when I came to Koolikorro; a considerable town,
and a great market for salt. Here I took up my lodging at the house of
a Bambarran, who had formerly been the slave of a Moor, and in that
character had travelled to Aroan, Towdinni, and many other places
in the Great Desert; but turning Mussulman, and his master dying at
Jenné, he obtained his freedom, and settled at this place, where
he carries on a considerable trade in salt, cotton-cloth, &c. His
knowledge of the world had not lessened that superstitious confidence
in saphies and charms, which he had imbibed in his earlier years;
for when he heard that I was a Christian, he immediately thought of
procuring a saphie; and for this purpose brought out his _walha_, or
writing board; assuring me, that he would dress me a supper of rice, if
I would write him a saphie to protect him from wicked men. The proposal
was of too great consequence to me to be refused; I therefore wrote
the board full, from top to bottom, on both sides; and my landlord, to
be certain of having the whole force of the charm, washed the writing
from the board into a calabash with a little water, and having said a
few prayers over it, drank this powerful draught; after which, lest
a single word should escape, he licked the board until it was quite
dry. A saphie writer was a man of too great consequence to be long
concealed: the important information was carried to the Dooty, who
sent his son with half a sheet of writing-paper, desiring me to write
him a _naphula saphie_ (a charm to procure wealth). He brought me,
as a present, some meal and milk; and when I had finished the saphie,
and read it to him with an audible voice, he seemed highly satisfied
with his bargain, and promised to bring me in the morning some milk
for my breakfast. When I had finished my supper of rice and salt,
I laid myself down upon a bullock’s hide, and slept very quietly
until morning; this being the first good meal and refreshing sleep
that I had enjoyed for a long time.

Aug. 21st. At daybreak I departed from Koolikorro, and about noon
passed the villages of Kayoo and Toolumbo. In the afternoon I
arrived at Marraboo; a large town, and, like Koolikorro, famous for
its trade in salt. I was conducted to the house of a Kaartan, of the
tribe of Jower, by whom I was well received. This man had acquired a
considerable property in the slave trade; and from his hospitality to
strangers, was called, by way of pre-eminence, _Jatee_ (the landlord);
and his house was a sort of public inn for all travellers. Those who
had money were well lodged, for they always made him some return
for his kindness; but those who had nothing to give, were content
to accept whatever he thought proper; and as I could not rank myself
among the monied men, I was happy to take up my lodging in the same
hut with seven poor fellows who had come from Kancaba in a canoe. But
our landlord sent us some victuals.

Aug. 22d. One of the landlord’s servants went with me a little
way from the town, to shew me what road to take; but, whether from
ignorance or design I know not, he directed me wrong; and I did not
discover my mistake until the day was far advanced; when, coming to a
deep creek, I had some thoughts of turning back; but as, by that means,
I foresaw that I could not possibly reach Bammakoo before night,
I resolved to cross it; and leading my horse close to the brink,
I went behind him, and pushed him headlong into the water; and then
taking the bridle in my teeth, swam over to the other side. This was
the third creek I had crossed in this manner, since I had left Sego;
but having secured my notes and memorandums in the crown of my hat,
I received little or no inconvenience from such adventures. The rain
and heavy dew kept my clothes constantly wet; and the roads being
very deep, and full of mud, such a washing was sometimes pleasant,
and oftentimes necessary. I continued travelling, through high grass,
without any beaten road, and about noon came to the river; the banks
of which are here very rocky, and the force and roar of the water were
very great. The King of Bambarra’s canoes, however, frequently pass
these rapids, by keeping close to the bank; persons being stationed
on the shore with ropes fastened to the canoe, while others push it
forward with long poles. At this time, however, it would, I think,
have been a matter of great difficulty for any European boat to have
crossed the stream. About four o’clock in the afternoon, having
altered my course from the river towards the mountains, I came to a
small pathway, which led to a village called Frookaboo, where I slept.

Aug. 23d. Early in the morning I set out for Bammakoo, at which
place I arrived about five o’clock in the afternoon. I had heard
Bammakoo much talked of as a great market for salt, and I felt
rather disappointed to find it only a middling town, not quite so
large as Marraboo: however, the smallness of its size, is more than
compensated by the richness of its inhabitants; for when the Moors
bring their salt through Kaarta or Bambarra, they constantly rest a
few days at this place; and the Negro merchants here, who are well
acquainted with the value of salt in different kingdoms, frequently
purchase by wholesale, and retail it to great advantage. Here I lodged
at the house of a Sera-Woolli Negro, and was visited by a number of
Moors. They spoke very good Mandingo, and were more civil to me than
their countrymen had been. One of them had travelled to Rio Grande,
and spoke very highly of the Christians. He sent me in the evening
some boiled rice and milk. I now endeavoured to procure information
concerning my route to the westward, from a slave merchant who had
resided some years on the Gambia. He gave me some imperfect account
of the distance, and enumerated the names of a great many places that
lay in the way; but withal told me, that the road was impassable at
this season of the year: he was even afraid, he said, that I should
find great difficulty in proceeding any farther; as the road crossed
the Joliba at a town about half a day’s journey to the westward
of Bammakoo; and there being no canoes at that place large enough to
receive my horse, I could not possibly get him over for some months to
come. This was an obstruction of a very serious nature; but as I had no
money to maintain myself even for a few days, I resolved to push on,
and if I could not convey my horse across the river, to abandon him,
and swim over myself. In thoughts of this nature I passed the night,
and in the morning consulted with my landlord, how I should surmount
the present difficulty. He informed me that one road still remained,
which was indeed very rocky, and scarcely passable for horses;
but that if I had a proper guide over the hills to a town called
Sibidooloo, he had no doubt, but with patience and caution, I might
travel forwards through Manding. I immediately applied to the Dooty,
and was informed that a _Jilli kea_ (singing man) was about to depart
for Sibidooloo, and would shew me the road over the hills. With this
man, who undertook to be my conductor, I travelled up a rocky glen
about two miles, when we came to a small village; and here my musical
fellow-traveller found out that he had brought me the wrong road. He
told me that the horse-road lay on the other side of the hill, and
throwing his drum upon his back, mounted up the rocks, where indeed no
horse could follow him, leaving me to admire his agility, and trace
out a road for myself. As I found it impossible to proceed, I rode
back to the level ground, and directing my course to the eastward,
came about noon to another glen, and discovered a path on which I
observed the marks of horses’ feet: following this path, I came in
a short time to some shepherds’ huts, where I was informed that I
was in the right road, but that I could not possibly reach Sibidooloo
before night. Soon after this I gained the summit of a hill, from
whence I had an extensive view of the country. Towards the south-east,
appeared some very distant mountains, which I had formerly seen from
an eminence near Marraboo, where the people informed me, that these
mountains were situated in a large and powerful kingdom called Kong;
the sovereign of which could raise a much greater army than the King
of Bambarra. Upon this height the soil is shallow; the rocks are
iron-stone and schistus, with detached pieces of white quartz.

A little before sunset, I descended on the north-west side of this
ridge of hills, and as I was looking about for a convenient tree, under
which to pass the night (for I had no hopes of reaching any town),
I descended into a delightful valley, and soon afterwards arrived
at a romantic village called Kooma. This village is surrounded by a
high wall, and is the sole property of a Mandingo merchant, who fled
hither with his family, during a former war. The adjacent fields yield
him plenty of corn, his cattle roam at large in the valley, and the
rocky hills secure him from the depredations of war. In this obscure
retreat he is seldom visited by strangers, but whenever this happens he
makes the weary traveller welcome. I soon found myself surrounded by
a circle of the harmless villagers. They asked a thousand questions
about my country; and, in return for my information, brought corn
and milk for myself, and grass for my horse; kindled a fire in the
hut where I was to sleep, and appeared very anxious to serve me.

Aug. 25th. I departed from Kooma, accompanied by two shepherds, who
were going towards Sibidooloo. The road was very steep and rocky,
and as my horse had hurt his feet much in coming from Bammakoo,
he travelled slowly and with great difficulty; for in many places
the ascent was so sharp, and the declivities so great, that if
he had made one false step, he must inevitably have been dashed to
pieces. The shepherds being anxious to proceed, gave themselves little
trouble about me or my horse, and kept walking on at a considerable
distance. It was about eleven o’clock, as I stopped to drink a
little water at a rivulet (my companions being near a quarter of
a mile before me), that I heard some people calling to each other,
and presently a loud screaming, as from a person in great distress. I
immediately conjectured that a lion had taken one of the shepherds,
and mounted my horse to have a better view of what had happened. The
noise, however, ceased; and I rode slowly towards the place from whence
I thought it had proceeded, calling out; but without receiving any
answer. In a little time, however, I perceived one of the shepherds
lying among the long grass near the road; and though I could see no
blood upon him, I concluded he was dead. But when I came close to him,
he whispered to me to stop; telling me that a party of armed men had
seized upon his companion, and shot two arrows at himself, as he
was making his escape. I stopped to consider what course to take,
and looking round, saw at a little distance a man sitting upon the
stump of a tree: I distinguished also the heads of six or seven more,
sitting among the grass, with muskets in their hands. I had now no
hopes of escaping, and therefore determined to ride forward towards
them. As I approached them, I was in hopes they were elephant hunters;
and by way of opening the conversation, inquired if they had shot
any thing; but without returning an answer, one of them ordered me
to dismount; and then, as if recollecting himself, waved with his
hand for me to proceed. I accordingly rode past, and had with some
difficulty crossed a deep rivulet, when I heard somebody holloa; and
looking behind, saw those I had taken for elephant hunters, running
after me, and calling out to me to turn back. I stopped until they
were all come up; when they informed me, that the King of the Foulahs
had sent them on purpose to bring me, my horse, and every thing that
belonged to me, to Fooladoo; and that therefore I must turn back,
and go along with them. Without hesitating a moment, I turned round
and followed them, and we travelled together near a quarter of a
mile, without exchanging a word; when coming to a dark place in the
wood, one of them said, in the Mandingo language, “this place will
do;” and immediately snatched my hat from my head. Though I was by
no means free of apprehension, yet I resolved to shew as few signs
of fear as possible, and therefore told them, that unless my hat was
returned to me, I should proceed no further. But before I had time to
receive an answer, another drew his knife, and seizing upon a metal
button which remained upon my waistcoat, cut it off, and put it into
his pocket. Their intentions were now obvious; and I thought that the
easier they were permitted to rob me of every thing, the less I had to
fear. I therefore allowed them to search my pockets without resistance,
and examine every part of my apparel, which they did with the most
scrupulous exactness. But observing that I had one waistcoat under
another, they insisted that I should cast them both off; and at last,
to make sure work, they stripped me quite naked. Even my half boots
(though the sole of one of them was tied on to my foot with a broken
bridle-rein), were minutely inspected. Whilst they were examining the
plunder, I begged them, with great earnestness, to return my pocket
compass; but when I pointed it out to them, as it was lying on the
ground, one of the banditti, thinking I was about to take it up,
cocked his musket and swore that he would lay me dead upon the spot,
if I presumed to put my hand upon it. After this, some of them went
away with my horse, and the remainder stood considering whether they
should leave me quite naked, or allow me something to shelter me from
the sun. Humanity at last prevailed: they returned me the worst of
the two shirts, and a pair of trowsers; and, as they went away, one of
them threw back my hat, in the crown of which I kept my memorandums;
and this was probably the reason they did not wish to keep it. After
they were gone, I sat for some time, looking around me with amazement
and terror. Which ever way I turned, nothing appeared but danger and
difficulty. I saw myself in the midst of a vast wilderness, in the
depth of the rainy season; naked and alone; surrounded by savage
animals, and men still more savage. I was five hundred miles from
the nearest European settlement. All these circumstances crowded at
once on my recollection; and I confess that my spirits began to fail
me. I considered my fate as certain, and that I had no alternative,
but to lie down and perish. The influence of religion, however, aided
and supported me. I reflected that no human prudence or foresight,
could possibly have averted my present sufferings. I was indeed a
stranger in a strange land, yet I was still under the protecting
eye of that Providence who has condescended to call himself the
stranger’s friend. At this moment, painful as my reflections
were, the extraordinary beauty of a small moss, in fructification,
irresistibly caught my eye. I mention this to shew from what trifling
circumstances the mind will sometimes derive consolation; for though
the whole plant was not larger than the top of one of my fingers,
I could not contemplate the delicate conformation of its roots,
leaves, and capsula, without admiration. Can that Being (thought I),
who planted, watered, and brought to perfection, in this obscure
part of the world, a thing which appears of so small importance,
look with unconcern upon the situation and sufferings of creatures
formed after his own image?—surely not! Reflections like these,
would not allow me to despair. I started up, and disregarding both
hunger and fatigue, travelled forwards, assured that relief was at
hand; and I was not disappointed. In a short time I came to a small
village, at the entrance of which I overtook the two shepherds who
had come with me from Kooma. They were much surprised to see me;
for they said, they never doubted that the Foulahs, when they had
robbed, had murdered me. Departing from this village, we travelled
over several rocky ridges, and at sunset, arrived at Sibidooloo;
the frontier town of the kingdom of Manding.




                              CHAPTER XIX.                              

_Government of Manding. — The Author’s Reception by the Mansa,
or chief Man of Sibidooloo, who takes Measures for the Recovery of his
Horse and Effects. — The Author removes to Wanda; — great Scarcity,
and its afflicting Consequences. — The Author recovers his Horse
and Clothes — presents his Horse to the Mansa; and prosecutes his
Journey to Kamalia — some Account of that Town. — The Author’s
kind Reception by Karfa Taura, a Slatee, who proposes to go to the
Gambia in the next dry Season, with a Caravan of Slaves. — The
Author’s Sickness, and Determination to remain and accompany Karfa._


The town of Sibidooloo is situated in a fertile valley, surrounded with
high rocky hills. It is scarcely accessible for horses, and during
the frequent wars between the Bambarrans, Foulahs, and Mandingoes,
has never once been plundered by an enemy. When I entered the town,
the people gathered round me, and followed me into the baloon;
where I was presented to the Dooty or chief man, who is here called
Mansa, which usually signifies king. Nevertheless, it appeared to me
that the government of Manding was a sort of republic, or rather an
oligarchy; every town having a particular Mansa, and the chief power
of the state, in the last resort, being lodged in the assembly of the
whole body. I related to the Mansa, the circumstances of my having
been robbed of my horse and apparel; and my story was confirmed by
the two shepherds. He continued smoking his pipe all the time I was
speaking; but I had no sooner finished, than taking his pipe from his
mouth, and tossing up the sleeve of his cloak with an indignant air,
“sit down (said he), you shall have every thing restored to you;
I have sworn it:”—and then turning to an attendant, “give the
white man (said he) a draught of water; and with the first light of
the morning, go over the hills, and inform the Dooty of Bammakoo,
that a poor white man, the King of Bambarra’s stranger, has been
robbed by the King of Fooladoo’s people.”

I little expected, in my forlorn condition, to meet with a man who
could thus feel for my sufferings. I heartily thanked the Mansa
for his kindness, and accepted his invitation to remain with him
until the return of the messenger. I was conducted into a hut,
and had some victuals sent me; but the crowd of people which
assembled to see me, all of whom commiserated my misfortunes,
and vented imprecations against the Foulahs, prevented me from
sleeping until past midnight. Two days I remained without hearing
any intelligence of my horse or clothes; and as there was at this
time a great scarcity of provisions, approaching even to famine,
all over this part of the country, I was unwilling to trespass any
farther on the Mansa’s generosity, and begged permission to depart
to the next village. Finding me very anxious to proceed, he told me
that I might go as far as a town called Wonda, where he hoped I would
remain a few days, until I heard some account of my horse, &c.

I departed accordingly on the next morning of the 28th, and stopped at
some small villages for refreshment. I was presented at one of them
with a dish which I had never before seen. It was composed of the
blossoms or _antheræ_ of the maize, stewed in milk and water. It
is eaten only in time of great scarcity. On the 30th, about noon,
I arrived at Wonda; a small town with a mosque, and surrounded by a
high wall. The Mansa, who was a Mahomedan, acted in two capacities;
as chief magistrate of the town, and schoolmaster to the children. He
kept his school in an open shed, where I was desired to take up my
lodging, until some account should arrive from Sibidooloo, concerning
my horse and clothes; for though the horse was of little use to me,
yet the few clothes were essential. The little raiment upon me could
neither protect me from the sun by day, nor the dews and musketoes
by night: indeed, my shirt was not only worn thin, like a piece of
muslin, but withal was so very dirty, that I was happy to embrace an
opportunity of washing it; which having done, and spread it upon a
bush, I sat down naked, in the shade, until it was dry.

Ever since the commencement of the rainy season, my health had been
greatly on the decline. I had often been affected with slight paroxysms
of fever; and from the time of leaving Bammakoo, the symptoms had
considerably increased. As I was sitting in the manner described,
the fever returned with such violence, that it very much alarmed me:
the more so, as I had no medicine to stop its progress, nor any hope
of obtaining that care and attention which my situation required.

I remained at Wonda nine days; during which time I experienced the
regular return of the fever every day. And though I endeavoured
as much as possible to conceal my distress from my landlord, and
frequently lay down the whole day, out of his sight, in a field of
corn; conscious how burthensome I was to him and his family, in a
time of such great scarcity; yet I found that he was apprized of my
situation; and one morning, as I feigned to be asleep by the fire,
he observed to his wife, that they were likely to find me a very
troublesome and chargeable guest; for that, in my present sickly state,
they should be obliged, for the sake of their good name, to maintain
me until I recovered, or died.

The scarcity of provisions was certainly felt at this time most
severely by the poor people, as the following circumstance most
painfully convinced me. Every evening, during my stay, I observed
five or six women come to the Mansa’s house, and receive each
of them a certain quantity of corn. As I knew how valuable this
article was at this juncture, I inquired of the Mansa, whether he
maintained these poor women from pure bounty, or expected a return
when the harvest should be gathered in. “Observe that boy said he,
(pointing to a fine child, about five years of age); “his mother
has sold him to me, for forty days’ provision for herself, and the
rest of her family. I have bought another boy in the same manner.”
Good God, thought I, what must a mother suffer, before she sells her
own child! I could not get this melancholy subject out of my mind,
and the next night, when the women returned for their allowance, I
desired the boy to point out to me his mother, which he did. She was
much emaciated, but had nothing cruel or savage in her countenance;
and when she had received her corn, she came and talked to her son,
with as much cheerfulness as if he had still been under her care.

Sept. 6th. Two people arrived from Sibidooloo, bringing with them my
horse and clothes; but I found that my pocket compass was broken to
pieces. This was a great loss, which I could not repair.

Sept. 7th. As my horse was grazing near the brink of a well, the
ground gave way, and he fell in. The well was about ten feet diameter,
and so very deep, that when I saw my horse snorting in the water,
I thought it was impossible to save him. The inhabitants of the
village, however, immediately assembled, and having tied together
a number of withes,[16] they lowered a man down into the well, who
fastened those withes round the body of the horse; and the people,
having first drawn up the man, took hold of the withes, and to my
surprise pulled the horse out with the greatest facility. The poor
animal was now reduced to a mere skeleton, and the roads were scarcely
passable, being either very rocky, or else full of mud and water;
I therefore found it impracticable to travel with him any farther,
and was happy to leave him in the hands of one who I thought would
take care of him. I accordingly presented him to my landlord; and
desired him to send my saddle and bridle, as a present, to the Mansa
of Sibidooloo; being the only return I could make him, for having
taken so much trouble in procuring my horse and clothes.

I now thought it necessary, sick as I was, to take leave of my
hospitable landlord. On the morning of Sept. 8th, when I was about to
depart, he presented me with his spear, as a token of remembrance,
and a leather bag to contain my clothes. Having converted my half
boots into sandals, I travelled with more ease, and slept that night
at a village called Ballanti. On the 9th, I reached Nemacoo; but the
Mansa of the village thought fit to make me sup upon the camelion’s
dish. By way of apology, however, he assured me the next morning, that
the scarcity of corn was such, that he could not possibly allow me
any. I could not accuse him of unkindness, as all the people actually
appeared to be starving.

Sept. 10th. It rained hard all day, and the people kept themselves
in their huts. In the afternoon, I was visited by a Negro, named Modi
Lemina Taura, a great trader, who, suspecting my distress, brought me
some victuals; and promised to conduct me to his own house at Kinyeto
the day following.

Sept. 11th. I departed from Nemacoo, and arrived at Kinyeto in the
evening; but having hurt my ankle in the way, it swelled and inflamed
so much that I could neither walk, nor set my foot to the ground,
the next day, without great pain. My landlord observing this, kindly
invited me to stop with him a few days; and I accordingly remained
at his house until the 14th; by which time I felt much relieved,
and could walk with the help of a staff. I now set out, thanking my
landlord for his great care and attention; and being accompanied by a
young man, who was travelling the same way, I proceeded for Jerijang,
a beautiful and well cultivated district, the Mansa of which is
reckoned the most powerful chief of any in Manding.

On the 15th, I reached Dosita, a large town, where I stayed one
day on account of the rain; but I continued very sickly, and was
slightly delirious in the night. On the 17th, I set out for Mansia,
a considerable town, where small quantities of gold are collected. The
road led over a high rocky hill, and my strength and spirits were so
much exhausted, that before I could reach the top of the hill, I was
forced to lie down three times, being very faint and sickly. I reached
Mansia in the afternoon. The Mansa of this town had the character of
being very inhospitable; he, however, sent me a little corn for my
supper, but demanded something in return: and when I assured him that
I had nothing of value in my possession, he told me (as if in jest),
that my white skin should not defend me, if I told him lies. He then
shewed me the hut wherein I was to sleep; but took away my spear,
saying that it should be returned to me in the morning. This trifling
circumstance, when joined to the character I had heard of the man,
made me rather suspicious of him; and I privately desired one of the
inhabitants of the place, who had a bow and quiver, to sleep in the
same hut with me. About midnight, I heard somebody approach the door,
and observing the moonlight strike suddenly into the hut, I started up,
and saw a man stepping cautiously over the threshold. I immediately
snatched up the Negro’s bow and quiver, the rattling of which made
the man withdraw: and my companion looking out, assured me that it was
the Mansa himself, and advised me to keep awake until the morning. I
closed the door, and placed a large piece of wood behind it; and was
wondering at this unexpected visit, when somebody pressed so hard
against the door, that the Negro could scarcely keep it shut. But
when I called to him to open the door, the intruder ran off, as before.

Sept. 16th. As soon as it was light, the Negro, at my request, went
to the Mansa’s house and brought away my spear. He told me that the
Mansa was asleep, and lest this inhospitable chief should devise means
to detain me, he advised me to set out before he was awake; which
I immediately did; and about two o’clock reached Kamalia, a small
town, the appearance of which is represented in the annexed Plate,
situated at the bottom of some rocky hills, where the inhabitants
collect gold in considerable quantities. The Bushreens here live
apart from the Kafirs, and have built their huts in a scattered
manner, at a short distance from the town. They have a place set
apart for performing their devotions in, to which they give the name
of _missura_, or mosque; but it is in fact nothing more than a square
piece of ground made level, and surrounded with the trunks of trees,
having a small projection towards the east, where the Marraboo, or
priest, stands, when he calls the people to prayers. Mosques of this
construction are very common among the converted Negroes; but having
neither walls nor roof, they can only be used in fine weather. When
it rains, the Bushreens perform their devotions in their huts.

[Illustration: _J. C. Barrow del. from a sketch by M. Park._

_W. C. Wilson sculpt._

A VIEW of KAMALIA.

_Publish’d Jany. 1.1799. by G. Nicol, Pall Mall._]

On my arrival at Kamalia, I was conducted to the house of a Bushreen
named Karfa Taura, the brother of him to whose hospitality I was
indebted at Kinyeto. He was collecting a coffle of slaves, with a
view to sell them to the Europeans on the Gambia, as soon as the
rains should be over. I found him sitting in his baloon, surrounded
by several Slatees, who proposed to join the coffle. He was reading to
them from an Arabic book; and inquired, with a smile, if I understood
it? Being answered in the negative, he desired one of the Slatees to
fetch the little curious book, which had been brought from the west
country. On opening this small volume, I was surprised, and delighted,
to find it our _Book of Common Prayer_; and Karfa expressed great
joy to hear that I could read it: for some of the Slatees, who had
seen the Europeans upon the Coast, observing the colour of my skin
(which was now become very yellow from sickness), my long beard,
ragged clothes, and extreme poverty; were unwilling to admit that I
was a white man, and told Karfa, that they suspected I was some Arab
in disguise. Karfa, however, perceiving that I could read this book,
had no doubt concerning me; and kindly promised me every assistance
in his power. At the same time he informed me, that it was impossible
to cross the Jallonka wilderness for many months yet to come, as no
less than eight rapid rivers, he said, lay in the way. He added, that
he intended to set out himself for Gambia as soon as the rivers were
fordable, and the grass burnt; and advised me to stay and accompany
him. He remarked, that when a caravan of the natives could not travel
through the country, it was idle for a single white man to attempt
it. I readily admitted that such an attempt was an act of rashness,
but I assured him that I had now no alternative; for having no money
to support myself, I must either beg my subsistence, by travelling
from place to place, or perish for want. Karfa now looked at me with
great earnestness, and inquired if I could eat the common victuals
of the country; assuring me he had never before seen a white man. He
added, that if I would remain with him until the rains were over,
he would give me plenty of victuals in the meantime, and a hut to
sleep in; and that after he had conducted me in safety to the Gambia,
I might then make him what return I thought proper. I asked him,
if the value of one prime slave would satisfy him. He answered in
the affirmative; and immediately ordered one of the huts to be swept
for my accommodation. Thus was I delivered, by the friendly care of
this benevolent Negro, from a situation truly deplorable. Distress
and famine pressed hard upon me; I had, before me, the gloomy wilds
of Jallonkadoo, where the traveller sees no habitation for five
successive days. I had observed at a distance, the rapid course of the
river Kokoro. I had almost marked out the place, where I was doomed,
I thought, to perish, when this friendly Negro stretched out his
hospitable hand for my relief.

In the hut which was appropriated for me, I was provided with a
mat to sleep on, an earthen jar for holding water, and a small
calabash to drink out of; and Karfa sent me from his own dwelling,
two meals a day; and ordered his slaves to supply me with fire-wood
and water. But I found that neither the kindness of Karfa, nor any
sort of accommodation could put a stop to the fever which weakened me,
and which became every day more alarming. I endeavoured as much as
possible to conceal my distress; but on the third day after my arrival,
as I was going with Karfa to visit some of his friends, I found myself
so faint that I could scarcely walk, and before we reached the place,
I staggered, and fell into a pit from which the clay had been taken
to build one of the huts. Karfa endeavoured to console me with the
hopes of a speedy recovery; assuring me, that if I would not walk out
in the wet, I should soon be well. I determined to follow his advice,
and confine myself to my hut; but was still tormented with the fever,
and my health continued to be in a very precarious state, for five
ensuing weeks. Sometimes I could crawl out of the hut, and sit a few
hours in the open air; at other times I was unable to rise, and passed
the lingering hours in a very gloomy and solitary manner. I was seldom
visited by any person except my benevolent landlord, who came daily to
inquire after my health. When the rains became less frequent, and the
country began to grow dry, the fever left me; but in so debilitated a
condition, that I could scarcely stand upright, and it was with great
difficulty that I could carry my mat to the shade of a tamarind tree,
at a short distance, to enjoy the refreshing smell of the corn-fields,
and delight my eyes with a prospect of the country. I had the pleasure,
at length, to find myself in a state of convalescence; towards which,
the benevolent and simple manners of the Negroes, and the perusal of
Karfa’s little volume, greatly contributed.

In the meantime, many of the Slatees who resided at Kamalia, having
spent all their money, and become in a great measure dependent upon
Karfa’s hospitality, beheld me with an eye of envy, and invented many
ridiculous and trifling stories to lessen me in Karfa’s esteem. And
in the beginning of December, a Sera-Woolli Slatee, with five slaves,
arrived from Sego: this man too, spread a number of malicious reports
concerning me; but Karfa paid no attention to them, and continued to
shew me the same kindness as formerly. As I was one day conversing
with the slaves which this Slatee had brought, one of them begged me
to give him some victuals. I told him I was a stranger, and had none to
give. He replied, “I gave _you_ victuals when you was hungry.—Have
you forgot the man who brought you milk at Karrankalla? But (added he,
with a sigh) _the irons were not then upon my legs!_” I immediately
recollected him, and begged some ground-nuts from Karfa to give him,
as a return for his former kindness. He told me that he had been taken
by the Bambarrans, the day after the battle at Joka, and sent to Sego;
where he had been purchased by his present master, who was carrying
him down to Kajaaga. Three more of these slaves were from Kaarta,
and one from Wassela, all of them prisoners of war. They stopped four
days at Kamalia, and were then taken to Bala, where they remained
until the river Kokoro was fordable, and the grass burnt.

In the beginning of December, Karfa proposed to complete his purchase
of slaves; and for this purpose, collected all the debts which were
owing to him in his own country. And on the 19th, being accompanied
by three Slatees, he departed for Kancaba, a large town on the banks
of the Niger; and a great slave-market. Most of the slaves, who are
sold at Kancaba, come from Bambarra; for Mansong, to avoid the expence
and danger of keeping all his prisoners at Sego, commonly sends them
in small parties, to be sold at the different trading towns; and as
Kancaba is much resorted to by merchants, it is always well supplied
with slaves, which are sent thither up the Niger in canoes. When Karfa
departed from Kamalia, he proposed to return in the course of a month;
and during his absence I was left to the care of a good old Bushreen,
who acted as schoolmaster to the young people of Kamalia.

Being now left alone, and at leisure to indulge my own reflections;
it was an opportunity not to be neglected of augmenting and extending
the observations I had already made, on the climate and productions
of the country; and of acquiring a more perfect knowledge of the
natives, than it was possible for me to obtain, in the course of a
transient and perilous journey through the country. I endeavoured
likewise to collect all the information I could, concerning those
important branches of African commerce, the trade for gold, ivory,
and slaves. Such was my employment, during the remainder of my stay
at Kamalia; and I shall now proceed to lay before my readers the
result of my researches and inquiries; avoiding, as far as I can,
a repetition of those circumstances and observations, which were
related, as occasion arose, in the narrative of my journey.


[Footnote 16: From a plant called _kabba_, that climbs like a vine
upon the trees.]




                              CHAPTER XX.                               

_Of the Climate and Seasons. — Winds. — Vegetable Productions. —
Population. — General Observations on the Character and Disposition
of the Mandingoes; and a summary Account of their Manners and Habits
of Life, their Marriages, &c._


The whole of my route, both in going and returning, having been
confined to a tract of country bounded nearly by the 12th and 15th
parallels of latitude, the reader must imagine that I found the climate
in most places extremely hot; but no where did I feel the heat so
intense and oppressive as in the camp at Benowm, of which mention
has been made in a former place. In some parts, where the country
ascends into hills, the air is at all times comparatively cool; yet
none of the districts which I traversed, could properly be called
mountainous. About the middle of June, the hot and sultry atmosphere
is agitated by violent gusts of wind, (called _tornadoes_) accompanied
with thunder and rain. These usher in what is denominated _the rainy
season_; which continues until the month of November. During this time,
the diurnal rains are very heavy; and the prevailing winds are from the
south-west. The termination of the rainy season, is likewise attended
with violent tornadoes; after which the wind shifts to the north-east,
and continues to blow from that quarter, during the rest of the year.

When the wind sets in from the north-east, it produces a wonderful
change in the face of the country. The grass soon becomes dry and
withered; the rivers subside very rapidly, and many of the trees shed
their leaves. About this period is commonly felt the _harmattan_, a
dry and parching wind, blowing from the north-east, and accompanied
by a thick smoky haze; through which the sun appears of a dull
red colour. This wind, in passing over the great desert of Sahara,
acquires a very strong attraction for humidity, and parches up every
thing exposed to its current. It is, however, reckoned very salutary,
particularly to Europeans, who generally recover their health during
its continuance. I experienced immediate relief from sickness, both
at Dr. Laidley’s, and at Kamalia, during the harmattan. Indeed, the
air during the rainy season is so loaded with moisture, that clothes,
shoes, trunks, and every thing that is not close to the fire, become
damp and mouldy; and the inhabitants may be said to live in a sort of
vapour bath: but this dry wind braces up the solids, which were before
relaxed, gives a cheerful flow of spirits, and is even pleasant to
respiration. Its ill effects are, that it produces chaps in the lips,
and afflicts many of the natives with sore eyes.

Whenever the grass is sufficiently dry, the Negroes set it on fire; but
in Ludamar, and other Moorish countries, this practice is not allowed;
for it is upon the withered stubble that the Moors feed their cattle,
until the return of the rains. The burning the grass in Manding
exhibits a scene of terrific grandeur. In the middle of the night,
I could see the plains and mountains, as far as my eye could reach,
variegated with lines of fire; and the light reflected on the sky, made
the heavens appear in a blaze. In the day time, pillars of smoke were
seen in every direction; while the birds of prey were observed hovering
round the conflagration, and pouncing down upon the snakes, lizards,
and other reptiles, which attempted to escape from the flames. This
annual burning is soon followed by a fresh and sweet verdure, and
the country is thereby rendered more healthful and pleasant.

Of the most remarkable and important of the vegetable productions,
mention has already been made; and they are nearly the same in all
the districts through which I passed. It is observable, however,
that although many species of the edible roots, which grow in the
West-India Islands, are found in Africa, yet I never saw, in any part
of my journey, either the sugar-cane, the coffee, or the cacao tree;
nor could I learn, on inquiry, that they were known to the natives. The
pineapple, and the thousand other delicious fruits, which the industry
of civilized man (improving the bounties of nature), has brought to
so great perfection in the tropical climates of America, are here
equally unknown. I observed, indeed, a few orange and banana trees,
near the mouth of the Gambia; but whether they were indigenous, or
were formerly planted there by some of the white traders, I could not
positively learn. I suspect, that they were originally introduced by
the Portuguese.

Concerning property in the soil; it appeared to me that the lands in
native woods, were considered as belonging to the king, or (where the
government was not monarchical) to the state. When any individual
of free condition, had the means of cultivating more land than he
actually possessed, he applied to the chief man of the district, who
allowed him an extension of territory, on condition of forfeiture if
the lands were not brought into cultivation by a given period. The
condition being fulfilled, the soil became vested in the possessor;
and, for aught that appeared to me, descended to his heirs.

The population, however, considering the extent and fertility of the
soil, and the ease with which lands are obtained, is not very great,
in the countries which I visited. I found many extensive and beautiful
districts, entirely destitute of inhabitants; and in general, the
borders of the different kingdoms, were either very thinly peopled, or
entirely deserted. Many places are likewise unfavourable to population,
from being unhealthful. The swampy banks of the Gambia, the Senegal,
and other rivers towards the Coast, are of this description. Perhaps,
it is on this account chiefly, that the interior countries abound
more with inhabitants, than the maritime districts; for all the Negro
nations that fell under my observation, though divided into a number
of petty independent states, subsist chiefly by the same means, live
nearly in the same temperature, and possess a wonderful similarity of
disposition. The Mandingoes, in particular, are a very gentle race;
cheerful in their dispositions, inquisitive, credulous, simple,
and fond of flattery. Perhaps, the most prominent defect in their
character, is that insurmountable propensity, which the reader must
have observed to prevail in all classes of them, to steal from me
the few effects I was possessed of. For this part of their conduct,
no complete justification can be offered, because theft is a crime
in their own estimation; and it must be observed, that they are
not habitually and generally guilty of it towards each other. This,
however, is an important circumstance in mitigation; and, before we
pronounce them a more depraved people than any other, it were well
to consider whether the lower order of people in any part of Europe,
would have acted, under similar circumstances, with greater honesty
towards a stranger, than the Negroes acted towards me. It must not be
forgotten, that the laws of the country afforded me no protection;
that every one was at liberty to rob me with impunity; and finally,
that some part of my effects were of as great value, in the estimation
of the Negroes, as pearls and diamonds would have been in the eyes
of a European. Let us suppose, a black merchant of Hindostan to have
found his way into the centre of England, with a box of jewels at
his back; and that the laws of the kingdom afforded him no security;
in such a case, the wonder would be, not that the stranger was
robbed of any part of his riches, but that any part was left for a
second depredator. Such, on sober reflection, is the judgment I have
formed concerning the pilfering disposition of the Mandingo Negroes
towards myself. Notwithstanding I was so great a sufferer by it,
I do not consider that their natural sense of justice was perverted
or extinguished: it was overpowered only, for the moment, by the
strength of a temptation which it required no common virtue to resist.

On the other hand, as some counterbalance to this depravity in their
nature, allowing it to be such, it is impossible for me to forget
the disinterested charity, and tender solicitude, with which many of
these poor heathens (from the sovereign of Sego, to the poor women
who received me at different times into their cottages, when I was
perishing of hunger) sympathized with me in my sufferings; relieved
my distresses; and contributed to my safety. This acknowledgment,
however, is perhaps more particularly due to the female part of the
nation. Among the men, as the reader must have seen, my reception,
though generally kind, was sometimes otherwise. It varied according to
the various tempers of those to whom I made application. The hardness
of avarice in some, and the blindness of bigotry in others, had closed
up the avenues to compassion: but I do not recollect a single instance
of hard-heartedness towards me in the women. In all my wanderings
and wretchedness, I found them uniformly kind and compassionate; and
I can truly say, as my predecessor Mr. Ledyard, has eloquently said
before me; “To a woman, I never addressed myself in the language
of decency and friendship, without receiving a decent and friendly
answer. If I was hungry, or thirsty, wet, or sick, they did not
hesitate, like the men, to perform a generous action. In so free,
and so kind a manner did they contribute to my relief; that if I was
dry, I drank the sweetest draught, and if hungry, I eat the coarsest
morsel with a double relish.”

It is surely reasonable to suppose, that the soft and amiable sympathy
of nature, which was thus spontaneously manifested towards me, in my
distress, is displayed by these poor people, as occasion requires, much
more strongly towards persons of their own nation and neighbourhood,
and especially when the objects of their compassion are endeared
to them by the ties of consanguinity. Accordingly, the maternal
affection (neither suppressed by the restraints, nor diverted by the
solicitudes of civilized life) is every where conspicuous among them;
and creates a correspondent return of tenderness in the child. An
illustration of this has been given in p. 47. “Strike me,” said
my attendant, “but do not curse my mother.” The same sentiment
I found universally to prevail, and observed in all parts of Africa,
that the greatest affront which could be offered to a Negro, was to
reflect on her who gave him birth.

It is not strange, that this sense of filial duty and affection
among the Negroes, should be less ardent towards the father than
the mother. The system of polygamy, while it weakens the father’s
attachment, by dividing it among the children of different wives,
concentrates all the mother’s jealous tenderness to one point, the
protection of her own offspring. I perceived with great satisfaction
too, that the maternal solicitude extended not only to the growth
and security of the person, but also, in a certain degree, to the
improvement of the mind of the infant; for one of the first lessons,
in which the Mandingo women instruct their children, is _the practice
of truth_. The reader will probably recollect the case of the unhappy
mother, whose son was murdered by the Moorish banditti, at Funingkedy,
p. 102.—Her only consolation, in her uttermost distress, was the
reflection that the poor boy, in the course of his blameless life,
_had never told a lie_. Such testimony, from a fond mother, on such
an occasion, must have operated powerfully on the youthful part of
the surrounding spectators. It was at once a tribute of praise to
the deceased, and a lesson to the living.

The Negro women suckle their children, until they are able to walk
of themselves. Three years nursing is not uncommon; and during this
period the husband devotes his whole attention to his other wives. To
this practice it is owing, I presume, that the family of each wife is
seldom very numerous. Few women have more than five or six children. As
soon as an infant is able to walk, it is permitted to run about with
great freedom. The mother is not over solicitous to preserve it from
slight falls, and other trifling accidents. A little practice soon
enables a child to take care of itself, and experience acts the
part of a nurse. As they advance in life, the girls are taught to
spin cotton, and to beat corn, and are instructed in other domestic
duties; and the boys are employed in the labours of the field. Both
sexes, whether Bushreens or Kafirs, on attaining the age of puberty,
are circumcised. This painful operation is not considered by the
Kafirs, so much in the light of a religious ceremony, as a matter of
convenience and utility. They have, indeed, a superstitious notion that
it contributes to render the marriage state prolific. The operation is
performed upon several young people at the same time; all of whom are
exempted from every sort of labour, for two months afterwards. During
this period, they form a society called _Solimana_. They visit the
towns and villages in the neighbourhood, where they dance and sing,
and are well treated by the inhabitants. I had frequently, in the
course of my journey, observed parties of this description, but they
were all males. I had, however, an opportunity of seeing a female
_Solimana_, at Kamalia.

In the course of this celebration, it frequently happens that some of
the young women get married. If a man takes a fancy to any one of them,
it is not considered as absolutely necessary, that he should make an
overture to the girl herself. The first object is to agree with the
parents, concerning the recompence to be given them, for the loss of
the company and services of their daughter. The value of two slaves
is a common price, unless the girl is thought very handsome; in which
case, the parents will raise their demand very considerably. If the
lover is rich enough, and willing to give the sum demanded, he then
communicates his wishes to the damsel; but her consent is by no means
necessary to the match; for if the parents agree to it, and eat a few
_kolla-nuts_, which are presented by the suitor as an earnest of the
bargain, the young lady must either have the man of their choice, or
continue unmarried, for she cannot afterwards be given to another. If
the parents should attempt it, the lover is then authorized, by the
laws of the country, to seize upon the girl as his slave. When the day
for celebrating the nuptials is fixed on, a select number of people
are invited to be present at the wedding: a bullock or goat is killed,
and great plenty of victuals dressed for the occasion. As soon as it
is dark, the bride is conducted into a hut, where a company of matrons
assist in arranging the wedding dress, which is always white cotton,
and is put on in such a manner as to conceal the bride from head to
foot. Thus arrayed, she is seated upon a mat, in the middle of the
floor, and the old women place themselves in a circle round her. They
then give her a series of instructions, and point out, with great
propriety, what ought to be her future conduct in life. This scene of
instruction, however, is frequently interrupted by girls, who amuse
the company with songs and dances, which are rather more remarkable
for their gaiety than delicacy. While the bride remains within the hut
with the women, the bridegroom devotes his attention to the guests of
both sexes, who assemble without doors, and by distributing among them
small presents of kolla-nuts, and seeing that every one partakes of
the good cheer which is provided, he contributes much to the general
hilarity of the evening. When supper is ended, the company spend the
remainder of the night in singing and dancing, and seldom separate
until daybreak. About midnight, the bride is privately conducted
by the women into the hut which is to be her future residence; and
the bridegroom, upon a signal given, retires from his company. The
new married couple, however, are always disturbed towards morning by
the women, who assemble to inspect the nuptial sheet, (according to
the manners of the ancient Hebrews, as recorded in Scripture,) and
dance round it. This ceremony is thought indispensably necessary;
nor is the marriage considered as valid without it.

The Negroes, as hath been frequently observed, whether Mahomedan or
Pagan, allow a plurality of wives. The Mahomedans alone, are by their
religion confined to four; and as the husband commonly pays a great
price for each, he requires from all of them the utmost deference
and submission, and treats them more like hired servants, than
companions. They have, however, the management of domestic affairs,
and each in rotation is mistress of the household, and has the care of
dressing the victuals, overlooking the female slaves, &c. But though
the African husbands are possessed of great authority over their
wives, I did not observe, that in general they treat them with cruelty;
neither did I perceive that mean jealousy in their dispositions, which
is so prevalent among the Moors. They permit their wives to partake
of all public diversions, and this indulgence is seldom abused; for
though the Negro women are very cheerful and frank in their behaviour,
they are by no means given to intrigue: I believe that instances
of conjugal infidelity are not common. When the wives quarrel among
themselves, a circumstance which, from the nature of their situation,
must frequently happen, the husband decides between them; and sometimes
finds it necessary to administer a little corporal chastisement, before
tranquillity can be restored. But if any one of the ladies complains
to the chief of the town, that her husband has unjustly punished her,
and shewn an undue partiality to some other of his wives, the affair
is brought to a public trial. In these _palavers_, however, which are
conducted chiefly by married men, I was informed that the complaint
of the wife, is not always considered in a very serious light; and the
complainant herself, is sometimes convicted of strife and contention,
and left without remedy. If she murmurs at the decision of the court,
the magic rod of _Mumbo Jumbo_ soon puts an end to the business.

The children of the Mandingoes are not always named after their
relations; but frequently in consequence of some remarkable
occurrence. Thus, my landlord at Kamalia, was called _Karfa_, a word
signifying _to replace_; because he was born shortly after the death
of one of his brothers. Other names are descriptive of good or bad
qualities; as _Modi_, “a good man;” _Fadibba_, “father of the
town,” &c.: indeed, the very names of their towns have something
descriptive in them; as _Sibidooloo_, “the town of ciboa trees;”
_Kenneyetoo_, “victuals here;” _Dosita_, “lift your spoon.”
Others appear to be given by way of reproach, as _Bammakoo_, “wash
a crocodile;” _Karrankalla_, “no cup to drink from, &c.” A
child is named, when it is seven or eight days old. The ceremony
commences by shaving the infant’s head; and a dish called _Dega_,
made of pounded corn and sour milk, is prepared for the guests. If the
parents are rich, a sheep or a goat is commonly added. This feast is
called _Ding koon lee_, “the child’s head shaving.” During my
stay at Kamalia, I was present at four different feasts of this kind,
and the ceremony was the same in each, whether the child belonged
to a Bushreen or a Kafir. The schoolmaster, who officiated as priest
on those occasions, and who is necessarily a Bushreen, first said a
long prayer over the _dega_; during which every person present took
hold of the brim of the calabash with his right hand. After this,
the schoolmaster took the child in his arms, and said a second prayer;
in which he repeatedly solicited the blessing of God upon the child,
and upon all the company. When this prayer was ended, he whispered a
few sentences in the child’s, ear, and spit three times in its face;
after which he pronounced its name aloud, and returned the infant
to the mother. This part of the ceremony being ended, the father of
the child divided the _dega_ into a number of balls, one of which
he distributed to every person present. And inquiry was then made,
if any person in the town was dangerously sick, it being usual,
in such cases, to send the party a large portion of the _dega_;
which is thought to possess great medical virtues.

Among the Negroes every individual, besides his own proper name,
has likewise a _kontong_, or surname, to denote the family or clan
to which he belongs. Some of these families are very numerous and
powerful. It is impossible to enumerate the various _kontongs_ which
are found in different parts of the country; though the knowledge of
many of them is of great service to the traveller; for as every Negro
plumes himself upon the importance, or the antiquity of his clan,
he is much flattered when he is addressed by his _kontong_.

Salutations, among the Negroes to each other, when they meet, are
always observed; but those in most general use among the Kafirs,
are _Abbe haeretto_,—_E ning seni_,—_Anawari, &c._ all of which
have nearly the same meaning, and signify, _are you well_, or to that
effect. There are likewise salutations which are used at different
times of the day, as _E ning somo_, good morning, &c. The general
answer to all salutations, is to repeat the _kontong_ of the person
who salutes, or else to repeat the salutation itself, first pronouncing
the word _marhaba_, my friend.




                              CHAPTER XXI.                              

_The Account of the Mandingoes continued. — Their Notions in
respect of the Planetary Bodies, and the Figure of the Earth. —
Their religious Opinions, and Belief in a Future State. — Their
Diseases and Methods of Treatment. — Their Funeral Ceremonies,
Amusements, Occupations, Diet, Arts, Manufactures, & c._


The Mandingoes, and I believe the Negroes in general, have no
artificial method of dividing time. They calculate the years by the
number of _rainy seasons_. They portion the year into _moons_, and
reckon the days by so many _suns_. The day, they divide into morning,
mid-day, and evening; and further subdivide it, when necessary, by
pointing to the sun’s place in the Heavens. I frequently inquired
of some of them, what became of the sun during the night, and whether
we should see the same sun, or a different one, in the morning: but I
found that they considered the question as very childish. The subject
appeared to them, as placed beyond the reach of human investigation:
they had never indulged a conjecture, nor formed any hypothesis about
the matter. The moon, by varying her form, has more attracted their
attention. On the first appearance of the new moon, which they look
upon to be newly created, the Pagan natives, as well as Mahomedans,
say a short prayer; and this seems to be the only visible adoration
which the Kafirs offer up to the Supreme Being. This prayer is
pronounced in a whisper; the party holding up his hands before his
face: its purport (as I have been assured by many different people)
is to return thanks to God for his kindness through the existence of
the past moon, and to solicit a continuation of his favour during that
of the new one. At the conclusion, they spit upon their hands, and
rub them over their faces. This seems to be nearly the same ceremony,
which prevailed among the Heathens in the days of Job.[17]

Great attention, however, is paid to the changes of this luminary,
in its monthly course; and it is thought very unlucky to begin a
journey, or any other work of consequence, in the last quarter. An
eclipse, whether of the sun or moon, is supposed to be effected by
witchcraft. The stars are very little regarded; and the whole study
of astronomy appears to them as a useless pursuit, and attended to
by such persons only as deal in magic.

Their notions of geography, are equally puerile. They imagine that
the world is an extended plain, the termination of which no eye has
discovered; it being, they say, overhung with clouds and darkness. They
describe the sea as a large river of salt water, on the farther shore
of which is situated a country called _Tobaubo doo_; “the land of
the white people.” At a distance from Tobaubo doo, they describe
another country, which they allege is inhabited by cannibals of
gigantic size, called _Koomi_. This country they call _Jong sang doo_
“the land where the slaves are sold.” But of all countries in the
world their own appears to them as the best, and their own people as
the happiest; and they pity the fate of other nations, who have been
placed by Providence in less fertile and less fortunate districts.

Some of the religious opinions of the Negroes, though blended with the
weakest credulity and superstition, are not unworthy attention. I have
conversed with all ranks and conditions, upon the subject of their
faith, and can pronounce, without the smallest shadow of doubt, that
the belief of one God, and of a future state of reward and punishment,
is entire and universal among them. It is remarkable, however, that,
except on the appearance of a new moon, as before related, the Pagan
natives do not think it necessary to offer up prayers and supplications
to the Almighty. They represent the Deity, indeed, as the creator and
preserver of all things; but in general they consider him as a Being
so remote, and of so exalted a nature, that it is idle to imagine the
feeble supplications of wretched mortals can reverse the decrees,
and change the purposes of unerring Wisdom. If they are asked, for
what reason then do they offer up a prayer on the appearance of the
new moon; the answer is, that custom has made it necessary: they do
it, because their fathers did it before them. Such is the blindness
of unassisted nature! The concerns of this world, they believe,
are committed by the Almighty to the superintendance and direction
of subordinate spirits, over whom they suppose that certain magical
ceremonies have great influence. A white fowl, suspended to the branch
of a particular tree; a snake’s head, or a few handfuls of fruit,
are offerings which ignorance and superstition frequently present, to
deprecate the wrath, or to conciliate the favour, of these tutelary
agents. But it is not often that the Negroes make their religious
opinions the subject of conversation: when interrogated, in particular,
concerning their ideas of a future state, they express themselves
with great reverence, but endeavour to shorten the discussion by
observing—_mo o mo inta allo_, “no man knows any thing about
it.” They are content, they say, to follow the precepts and examples
of their forefathers, through the various vicissitudes of life;
and when this world presents no objects of enjoyment or of comfort,
they seem to look with anxiety towards another, which they believe
will be better suited to their natures; but concerning which they
are far from indulging vain and delusive conjectures.

The Mandingoes seldom attain extreme old age. At forty, most of them
become gray haired, and covered with wrinkles; and but few of them
survive the age of fifty-five, or sixty. They calculate the years
of their lives, as I have already observed, by the number of rainy
seasons (there being but one such in the year); and distinguish each
year by a particular name, founded on some remarkable occurrence which
happened in that year. Thus they say the year of the _Farbanna war_;
the year of the _Kaarta war_; the year on which _Gadou was plundered,
&c. &c._; and I have no doubt that the year 1796, will in many places
be distinguished by the name of _Tobaubo tambi sang_, “the year
the white man passed;” as such an occurrence would naturally form
an epoch in their traditional history.

But, notwithstanding that longevity is uncommon among them, it appeared
to me that their diseases are but few in number. Their simple diet,
and active way of life, preserve them from many of those disorders,
which embitter the days of luxury and idleness. Fevers and fluxes are
the most common, and the most fatal. For these, they generally apply
saphies to different parts of the body, and perform a great many other
superstitious ceremonies; some of which are, indeed, well calculated to
inspire the patient with the hope of recovery, and divert his mind from
brooding over his own danger. But I have sometimes observed among them,
a more systematic mode of treatment. On the first attack of a fever,
when the patient complains of cold, he is frequently placed in a sort
of vapour bath: this is done by spreading branches of the _nauclea
orientalis_ upon hot wood embers, and laying the patient upon them,
wrapped up in a large cotton cloth. Water is then sprinkled upon the
branches, which descending to the hot embers, soon covers the patient
with a cloud of vapour, in which he is allowed to remain until the
embers are almost extinguished. This practice commonly produces a
profuse perspiration, and wonderfully relieves the sufferer.

For the dysentery, they use the bark of different trees reduced to
powder, and mixed with the patient’s food; but this practice is in
general very unsuccessful.

The other diseases which prevail among the Negroes, are the _yaws_;
the _elephantiasis_; and a _leprosy_ of the very worst kind. This
last mentioned complaint appears, at the beginning, in scurfy
spots upon different parts of the body; which finally settle upon
the hands or feet, where the skin becomes withered, and cracks in
many places. At length, the ends of the fingers swell and ulcerate;
the discharge is acrid and fetid; the nails drop off, and the bones
of the fingers become carious, and separate at the joints. In this
manner the disease continues to spread, frequently until the patient
loses all his fingers and toes. Even the hands and feet are sometimes
destroyed by this inveterate malady, to which the Negroes give the
name of _balla jou_, “incurable.”

The _Guinea worm_ is likewise very common in certain places, especially
at the commencement of the rainy season. The Negroes attribute this
disease, which has been described by many writers, to bad water; and
allege that the people who drink from wells, are more subject to it
than those who drink from streams. To the same cause, they attribute
the swelling of the glands of the neck (goitres), which are very common
in some parts of Bambarra. I observed also, in the interior countries,
a few instances of simple gonorrhœa; but never the confirmed lues. On
the whole, it appeared to me that the Negroes are better surgeons
than physicians. I found them very successful in their management
of fractures and dislocations, and their splints and bandages are
simple, and easily removed. The patient is laid upon a soft mat, and
the fractured limb is frequently bathed with cold water. All abscesses
they open with the actual cautery; and the dressings are composed of
either soft leaves, Shea butter, or cows’ dung, as the case seems,
in their judgment, to require. Towards the Coast, where a supply of
European lancets can be procured, they sometimes perform phlebotomy;
and in cases of local inflammation, a curious sort of cupping is
practised. This operation is performed by making incisions in the
part, and applying to it a bullock’s horn, with a small hole in
the end. The operator then takes a piece of bees-wax in his mouth,
and putting his lips to the hole, extracts the air from the horn;
and by a dexterous use of his tongue, stops up the hole with the
wax. This method is found to answer the purpose, and in general
produces a plentiful discharge.

When a person of consequence dies, the relations and neighbours meet
together, and manifest their sorrow by loud and dismal howlings. A
bullock or goat is killed for such persons as come to assist at the
funeral; which generally takes place in the evening of the same day on
which the party died. The Negroes have no appropriate burial places,
and frequently dig the grave in the floor of the deceased’s hut,
or in the shade of a favourite tree. The body is dressed in white
cotton, and wrapped up in a mat. It is carried to the grave, in the
dusk of the evening, by the relations. If the grave is without the
walls of the town, a number of prickly bushes are laid upon it, to
prevent the wolves from digging up the body; but I never observed
that any stone was placed over the grave, as a monument or memorial.

Hitherto I have considered the Negroes chiefly in a moral light;
and confined myself to the most prominent features in their mental
character: their domestic amusements, occupations, and diet; their
arts and manufactures, with some other subordinate objects, are now
to be noticed.

Of their music and dances, some account has incidentally been given in
different parts of my Journal. On the first of these heads, I have now
to add a list of their musical instruments, the principal of which
are,—the _koonting_, a sort of guitar with three strings;—the
_korro_, a large harp, with eighteen strings;—the _simbing_, a small
harp, with seven strings;— the _balafou_, an instrument composed
of twenty pieces of hard wood of different lengths, with the shells
of gourds hung underneath, to increase the sound;—the _tangtang_,
a drum, open at the lower end; and lastly, the _tabala_, a large drum,
commonly used to spread an alarm through the country. Besides these,
they make use of small flutes, bowstrings, elephants’ teeth, and
bells; and at all their dances and concerts, _clapping of hands_
appears to constitute a necessary part of the chorus.

With the love of music is naturally connected a taste for poetry;
and, fortunately for the poets of Africa, they are in a great measure
exempted from that neglect and indigence, which in more polished
countries commonly attend the votaries of the Muses. They consist
of two classes; the most numerous are the _singing men_, called
_Jilli kea_, mentioned in a former part of my narrative. One or
more of these may be found in every town. They sing extempore songs,
in honour of their chief men, or any other persons who are willing
to give “solid pudding for empty praise.” But a nobler part of
their office is to recite the historical events of their country:
hence, in war, they accompany the soldiers to the field; in order,
by reciting the great actions of their ancestors, to awaken in them
a spirit of glorious emulation. The other class, are devotees of the
Mahomedan faith, who travel about the country, singing devout hymns,
and performing religious ceremonies, to conciliate the favour of
the Almighty; either in averting calamity, or insuring success to
any enterprize. Both descriptions of these itinerant bards are much
employed and respected by the people, and very liberal contributions
are made for them.

The usual diet of the Negroes is somewhat different in different
districts; in general, the people of free condition breakfast about
daybreak, upon gruel made of meal and water, with a little of the
fruit of the tamarind to give it an acid taste. About two o’clock
in the afternoon, a sort of hasty pudding, with a little Shea butter,
is the common meal; but the supper constitutes the principal repast,
and is seldom ready before midnight. This consists almost universally
of kouskous, with a small portion of animal food, or Shea butter,
mixed with it. In eating, the Kafirs, as well as Mahomedans, use the
right hand only.

The beverage of the Pagan Negroes, are beer and mead; of each of
which they frequently drink to excess. The Mahomedan converts drink
nothing but water. The natives of all descriptions take snuff and
smoke tobacco; their pipes are made of wood, with an earthen bowl of
curious workmanship. But in the interior countries, the greatest of
all luxuries is salt. It would appear strange to an European, to see
a child suck a piece of rock-salt, as if it were sugar. This, however,
I have frequently seen; although, in the inland parts, the poorer class
of inhabitants are so very rarely indulged with this precious article,
that to say _a man eats salt with his victuals_, is the same as saying,
_he is a rich man_. I have myself suffered great inconvenience from the
scarcity of this article. The long use of vegetable food, creates so
painful a longing for salt, that no words can sufficiently describe it.

The Negroes in general, and the Mandingoes in particular, are
considered by the whites on the Coast as an indolent and inactive
people; I think, without reason. The nature of the climate is, indeed,
unfavourable to great exertion; but surely a people cannot justly be
denominated habitually indolent, whose wants are supplied, not by the
spontaneous productions of nature, but by their own exertions. Few
people work harder, when occasion requires, than the Mandingoes; but
not having many opportunities of turning to advantage, the superfluous
produce of their labour, they are content with cultivating as much
ground only, as is necessary for their own support. The labours of
the field give them pretty full employment during the rains; and in
the dry season, the people who live in the vicinity of large rivers,
employ themselves chiefly in fishing. The fish are taken in wicker
baskets, or with small cotton nets; and are preserved by being
first dried in the sun, and afterwards rubbed with Shea butter,
to prevent them from contracting fresh moisture. Others of the
natives employ themselves in hunting. Their weapons are bows and
arrows; but the arrows in common use are not poisoned.[18] They
are very dexterous marksmen, and will hit a lizard on a tree, or
any other small object, at an amazing distance. They likewise kill
Guinea-fowls, partridges, and pigeons, but never on the wing. While
the men are occupied in these pursuits, the women are very diligent
in manufacturing cotton-cloth. They prepare the cotton for spinning,
by laying it in small quantities at a time, upon a smooth stone, or
piece of wood, and rolling the seeds out with a thick iron spindle;
and they spin it with the distaff. The thread is not fine, but well
twisted, and makes a very durable cloth. A woman with common diligence,
will spin from six to nine garments of this cloth in one year; which,
according to its fineness, will sell for a minkalli and a half, or two
minkallies each.[19] The weaving is performed by the men. The loom is
made exactly upon the same principle as that of Europe; but so small
and narrow, that the web is seldom more than four inches broad. The
shuttle is of the common construction; but as the thread is coarse,
the chamber is somewhat larger than the European.

The women die this cloth of a rich and lasting blue colour, by the
following simple process: the leaves of the indigo when fresh gathered,
are pounded in a wooden mortar, and mixed in a large earthen jar,
with a strong ley of wood ashes; chamber-ley is sometimes added. The
cloth is steeped in this mixture, and allowed to remain until it has
acquired the proper shade. In Kaarta and Ludamar, where the indigo
is not plentiful, they collect the leaves, and dry them in the sun;
and when they wish to use them, they reduce a sufficient quantity
to powder, and mix it with the ley as before mentioned. Either way,
the colour is very beautiful, with a fine purple gloss; and equal,
in my opinion, to the best Indian or European blue. This cloth is
cut into various pieces, and sewed into garments, with needles of
the natives’ own making.

As the arts of weaving, dying, sewing, &c. may easily be acquired,
those who exercise them are not considered in Africa as following any
particular profession; for almost every slave can weave, and every boy
can sew. The only artists which are distinctly acknowledged as such
by the Negroes, and who value themselves on exercising appropriate and
peculiar trades, are the manufacturers of _leather_ and of _iron_. The
first of these, are called _Karrankea_ (or as the word is sometimes
pronounced _Gaungay_). They are to be found in almost every town,
and they frequently travel through the country in the exercise of
their calling. They tan and dress leather with very great expedition,
by steeping the hide first in a mixture of wood-ashes and water,
until it parts with the hair; and afterwards by using the pounded
leaves of a tree called _goo_, as an astringent. They are at great
pains to render the hide as soft and pliant as possible, by rubbing
it frequently between their hands, and beating it upon a stone. The
hides of bullocks are converted chiefly into sandals, and therefore
require less care in dressing than the skins of sheep and goats, which
are used for covering quivers and saphies, and in making sheaths for
swords and knives, belts, pockets, and a variety of ornaments. These
skins are commonly dyed of a red or yellow colour; the red, by means
of millet stalks reduced to powder; and the yellow, by the root of
a plant, the name of which I have forgotten.

The manufacturers in iron are not so numerous as the _Karrankeas_; but
they appear to have studied their business with equal diligence. The
Negroes on the Coast being cheaply supplied with iron from the European
traders, never attempt the manufacturing of this article themselves;
but in the inland parts, the natives smelt this useful metal in
such quantities, as not only to supply themselves from it with all
necessary weapons and instruments, but even to make it an article
of commerce with some of the neighbouring states. During my stay at
Kamalia, there was a smelting furnace at a short distance from the hut
where I lodged, and the owner and his workmen made no secret about
the manner of conducting the operation; and readily allowed me to
examine the furnace, and assist them in breaking the iron-stone. The
furnace was a circular tower of clay, about ten feet high, and three
feet in diameter; surrounded in two places with withes, to prevent
the clay from cracking and falling to pieces by the violence of the
heat. Round the lower part, on a level with the ground (but not so
low as the bottom of the furnace, which was somewhat concave), were
made seven openings, into every one of which were placed three tubes
of clay, and the openings again plastered up in such a manner that no
air could enter the furnace, but through the tubes; by the opening and
shutting of which they regulated the fire. These tubes were formed by
plastering a mixture of clay and grass round a smooth roller of wood,
which as soon as the clay began to harden was withdrawn, and the tube
left to dry in the sun. The iron-stone which I saw was very heavy,
of a dull red colour, with greyish specks; it was broken into pieces
about the size of a hen’s egg. A bundle of dry wood was first put
into the furnace, and covered with a considerable quantity of charcoal,
which was brought, ready burnt, from the woods. Over this was laid
a stratum of iron-stone, and then another of charcoal, and so on,
until the furnace was quite full. The fire was applied through one
of the tubes, and blown for some time with bellows made of goats’
skins. The operation went on very slowly at first, and it was some
hours before the flame appeared above the furnace; but after this,
it burnt with great violence all the first night; and the people who
attended put in at times more charcoal. On the day following the fire
was not so fierce, and on the second night, some of the tubes were
withdrawn, and the air allowed to have freer access to the furnace;
but the heat was still very great, and a bluish flame rose some feet
above the top of the furnace. On the third day from the commencement of
the operation, all the tubes were taken out, the ends of many of them
being vitrified with the heat; but the metal was not removed until
some days afterwards, when the whole was perfectly cool. Part of the
furnace was then taken down, and the iron appeared in the form of a
large irregular mass, with pieces of charcoal adhering to it. It was
sonorous; and when any portion was broken off, the fracture exhibited
a granulated appearance, like broken steel. The owner informed me
that many parts of this cake were useless, but still there was good
iron enough to repay him for his trouble. This iron, or rather steel,
is formed into various instruments, by being repeatedly heated in
a forge, the heat of which is urged by a pair of double bellows,
of a very simple construction, being made of two goats’ skins;
the tubes from which unite, before they enter the forge, and supply a
constant and very regular blast. The hammer, forceps, and anvil, are
all very simple, and the workmanship (particularly in the formation
of knives and spears) is not destitute of merit. The iron, indeed,
is hard and brittle; and requires much labour before it can be made
to answer the purpose.

Most of the African blacksmiths are acquainted also with the method of
smelting gold, in which process they use an alkaline salt, obtained
from a ley of burnt corn-stalks evaporated to dryness. They likewise
draw the gold into wire, and form it into a variety of ornaments,
some of which are executed with a great deal of taste and ingenuity.

Such is the chief information I obtained, concerning the present state
of arts and manufactures in those regions of Africa which I explored
in my journey. I might add, though it is scarce worthy observation,
that in Bambarra and Kaarta, the natives make very beautiful baskets,
hats, and other articles, both for use and ornament, from _rushes_,
which they stain of different colours; and they contrive also to
cover their calabashes with interwoven cane, dyed in the same manner.

In all the laborious occupations above described, the master and his
slaves work together, without any distinction of superiority. Hired
servants, by which I mean persons of free condition, voluntarily
working for pay, are unknown in Africa; and this observation naturally
leads me to consider the condition of the slaves, and the various means
by which they are reduced to so miserable a state of servitude. This
unfortunate class are found, I believe, in all parts of this extensive
country, and constitute a considerable branch of commerce, with the
states on the Mediterranean, as well as with the nations of Europe.


[Footnote 17: Chap, xxxi. ver. 26, 27, 28.]

[Footnote 18: Poisoned arrows are used chiefly in war. The poison,
which is said to be very deadly, is prepared from a shrub called
_koona_, (a species of _echites_) which is very common in the
woods. The leaves of this shrub, when boiled with a small quantity
of water, yield a thick black juice, into which the Negroes dip a
cotton thread; this thread they fasten round the iron of the arrow,
in such a manner that it is almost impossible to extract the arrow,
when it has sunk beyond the barbs, without leaving the iron point,
and the poisoned thread, in the wound.]

[Footnote 19: A minkalli is a quantity of gold, nearly equal in value
to ten shillings sterling.]




                             CHAPTER XXII.                              

_Observations concerning the State and Sources of Slavery in Africa._


A state of subordination, and certain inequalities of rank and
condition, are inevitable in every stage of civil society; but when
this subordination is carried to so great a length, that the persons
and services of one part of the community are entirely at the disposal
of another part, it may then be denominated a state of slavery; and
in this condition of life, a great body of the Negro inhabitants of
Africa have continued from the most early period of their history; with
this aggravation, that their children are born to no other inheritance.

The slaves in Africa, I suppose, are nearly in the proportion of
three to one to the freemen. They claim no reward for their services,
except food and clothing; and are treated with kindness, or severity,
according to the good or bad disposition of their masters. Custom,
however, has established certain rules with regard to the treatment
of slaves, which it is thought dishonourable to violate. Thus,
the domestic slaves, or such as are born in a man’s own house,
are treated with more lenity than those which are purchased with
money. The authority of the master over the domestic slave, as I have
elsewhere observed, extends only to reasonable correction; for the
master cannot sell his domestic, without having first brought him
to a public trial, before the chief men of the place[20] But these
restrictions on the power of the master, extend not to the case of
prisoners taken in war, nor to that of slaves purchased with money. All
these unfortunate beings are considered as strangers and foreigners,
who have no right to the protection of the law, and may be treated
with severity, or sold to a stranger, according to the pleasure of
their owners. There are, indeed, regular markets, where slaves of this
description are bought and sold; and the value of a slave in the eye
of an African purchaser, increases in proportion to his distance from
his native kingdom: for when slaves are only a few days’ journey
from the place of their nativity, they frequently effect their escape;
but when one or more kingdoms intervene, escape being more difficult,
they are more readily reconciled to their situation. On this account,
the unhappy slave is frequently transferred from one dealer to another,
until he has lost all hopes of returning to his native kingdom. The
slaves which are purchased by the Europeans on the Coast, are chiefly
of this description; a few of them are collected in the petty wars,
hereafter to be described, which take place near the Coast; but by
far the greater number are brought down in large caravans from the
inland countries, of which many are unknown, even by name, to the
Europeans. The slaves which are thus brought from the interior, may
be divided into two distinct classes; _first_, such as were slaves
from their birth, having been born of enslaved mothers; _secondly_,
such as were born free, but who afterwards, by whatever means, became
slaves. Those of the first description, are by far the most numerous;
for prisoners taken in war (at least such as are taken in open and
declared war, when one kingdom avows hostilities against another)
are generally of this description. The comparatively small proportion
of free people, to the enslaved, throughout Africa, has already
been noticed; and it must be observed, that men of free condition,
have many advantages over the slaves, even in war time. They are in
general better armed, and well mounted; and can either fight or escape,
with some hopes of success; but the slaves, who have only their spears
and bows, and of whom great numbers are loaded with baggage, become an
easy prey. Thus, when Mansong, King of Bambarra, made war upon Kaarta
(as I have related in a former Chapter), he took in one day nine
hundred prisoners, of which number not more than seventy were free
men. This account I received from Daman Jumma, who had thirty slaves
at Kemmoo, all of whom were made prisoners by Mansong. Again, when
a freeman is taken prisoner, his friends will sometimes ransom him,
by giving two slaves in exchange; but when a slave is taken, he has no
hopes of such redemption. To these disadvantages, it is to be added,
that the Slatees, who purchase slaves in the interior countries, and
carry them down to the Coast for sale, constantly prefer such as have
been in that condition of life from their infancy, well knowing that
these have been accustomed to hunger and fatigue, and are better able
to sustain the hardships of a long and painful journey, than free men;
and on their reaching the Coast, if no opportunity offers of selling
them to advantage, they can easily be made to maintain themselves by
their labour; neither are they so apt to attempt making their escape,
as those who have once tasted the blessings of freedom.

Slaves of the second description, generally become such by one or other
of the following causes, 1. _Captivity._ 2. _Famine._ 3. _Insolvency._
4. _Crimes._ A freeman may, by the established customs of Africa,
become a slave, by being taken in war. War, is of all others, the
most productive source, and was probably the origin, of slavery; for
when one nation had taken from another, a greater number of captives
than could be exchanged on equal terms, it is natural to suppose that
the conquerors, finding it inconvenient to maintain their prisoners,
would compel them to labour; at first, perhaps, only for their own
support; but afterwards to support their masters. Be this as it may,
it is a known fact, that prisoners of war in Africa, are the slaves
of the conquerors; and when the weak or unsuccessful warrior, begs
for mercy beneath the uplifted spear of his opponent, he gives up
at the same time his claim to liberty; and purchases his life at the
expence of his freedom.

In a country, divided into a thousand petty states, mostly independent
and jealous of each other; where every freeman is accustomed to arms,
and fond of military achievements; where the youth who has practised
the bow and spear from his infancy, longs for nothing so much as
an opportunity to display his valour, it is natural to imagine that
wars frequently originate from very frivolous provocation. When one
nation is more powerful than another, a pretext is seldom wanting
for commencing hostilities. Thus the war between Kajaaga and Kasson
was occasioned by the detention of a fugitive slave; that between
Bambarra and Kaarta by the loss of a few cattle. Other cases of the
same nature perpetually occur, in which the folly or mad ambition of
their princes, and the zeal of their religious enthusiasts, give full
employment to the scythe of desolation.

The wars of Africa are of two kinds, which are distinguished
by different appellations: that species which bears the greatest
resemblance to our European contests, is denominated _killi_, a word
signifying “to call out,” because such wars are openly avowed,
and previously declared. Wars of this description in Africa, commonly
terminate, however, in the course of a single campaign. A battle
is fought; the vanquished seldom think of rallying again; the whole
inhabitants become panic struck; and the conquerors have only to bind
the slaves, and carry off their plunder and their victims. Such of the
prisoners as, through age or infirmity, are unable to endure fatigue,
or are found unfit for sale, are considered as useless; and I have
no doubt are frequently put to death. The same fate commonly awaits
a chief, or any other person who has taken a very distinguished part
in the war. And here it may be observed that, notwithstanding this
exterminating system, it is surprising to behold how soon an African
town is rebuilt and repeopled. The circumstance arises probably from
this; that their pitched battles are few; the weakest know their own
situation, and seek safety in flight. When their country has been
desolated, and their ruined towns and villages deserted by the enemy,
such of the inhabitants as have escaped the _sword_, and the _chain_,
generally return, though with cautious steps, to the place of their
nativity; for it seems to be the universal wish of mankind, to spend
the evening of their days where they passed their infancy. The poor
Negro feels this desire in its full force. To him, no water is sweet
but what is drawn from his own well; and no tree has so cool and
pleasant a shade as the _tabba_ tree[21] of his native village. When
war compels him to abandon the delightful spot in which he first drew
his breath, and seek for safety in some other kingdom, his time is
spent in talking about the country of his ancestors; and no sooner
is peace restored than he turns his back upon the land of strangers,
rebuilds with haste his fallen walls, and exults to see the smoke
ascend from his native village.

The other species of African warfare, is distinguished by the
appellation of _tegria_, “plundering or stealing.” It arises
from a sort of hereditary feud, which the inhabitants of one nation
or district bear towards another. No immediate cause of hostility
is assigned, or notice of attack given; but the inhabitants of
each, watch every opportunity to plunder and distress the objects
of their animosity by predatory excursions. These, are very common,
particularly about the beginning of the dry season, when the labour of
the harvest is over and provisions are plentiful. Schemes of vengeance
are then meditated. The chief man surveys the number and activity of
his vassals, as they brandish their spears at festivals; and elated
with his own importance, turns his whole thoughts towards revenging
some depredation or insult, which either he or his ancestors may have
received from a neighbouring state.

Wars of this description are generally conducted with great secrecy. A
few resolute individuals, headed by some person of enterprise and
courage, march quietly through the woods, surprize in the night some
unprotected village, and carry off the inhabitants and their effects,
before their neighbours can come to their assistance. One morning,
during my stay at Kamalia, we were all much alarmed by a party of this
kind. The king of Fooladoo’s son, with five hundred horsemen, passed
secretly through the woods, a little to the southward of Kamalia, and
on the morning following, plundered three towns belonging to Madigai,
a powerful chief in Jallonkadoo.

The success of this expedition encouraged the governor of Bangassi,
a town in Fooladoo, to make a second inroad upon another part of the
same country. Having assembled about two hundred of his people, he
passed the river Kokoro in the night, and carried off a great number of
prisoners. Several of the inhabitants who had escaped these attacks,
were afterwards seized by the Mandingoes, as they wandered about in
the woods, or concealed themselves in the glens and strong places of
the mountains.

These plundering excursions, always produce speedy retaliation;
and when large parties cannot be collected for this purpose, a
few friends will combine together, and advance into the enemy’s
country, with a view to plunder, or carry off the inhabitants. A single
individual has been known to take his bow and quiver, and proceed in
like manner. Such an attempt is doubtless in him an act of rashness;
but when it is considered that, in one of these predatory wars, he
has probably been deprived of his child or his nearest relation, his
situation will rather call for pity than censure. The poor sufferer,
urged on by the feelings of domestic or paternal attachment, and
the ardour of revenge, conceals himself among the bushes, until some
young or unarmed person passes by. He then, tyger-like, springs upon
his prey; drags his victim into the thicket, and in the night carries
him off as a slave.

When a Negro has, by means like these, once fallen into the hands
of his enemies, he is either retained as the slave of his conqueror,
or bartered into a distant kingdom; for an African, when he has once
subdued his enemy, will seldom give him an opportunity of lifting
up his hand against him at a future period. A conqueror commonly
disposes of his captives according to the rank which they held in
their native kingdom. Such of the domestic slaves as appear to be of
a mild disposition, and particularly the young women, are retained as
his own slaves. Others that display marks of discontent, are disposed
of in a distant country; and such of the freemen or slaves, as have
taken an active part in the war, are either sold to the Slatees,
or put to death. War, therefore, is certainly the most general, and
most productive source of slavery; and the desolations of war often
(but not always) produce the second cause of slavery, _famine_;
in which case a freeman becomes a slave, to avoid a greater calamity.

Perhaps, by a philosophic and reflecting mind, death itself would
scarcely be considered as a greater calamity than slavery; but the poor
Negro, when fainting with hunger, thinks like ESAU of old; “_behold
I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright do to
me?_” There are many instances of free men voluntarily surrendering
up their liberty to save their lives. During a great scarcity which
lasted for three years, in the countries of the Gambia, great numbers
of people became slaves in this manner. Dr. Laidley assured me that,
at that time, many free men came and begged, with great earnestness,
_to be put upon his slave-chain_, to save them from perishing of
hunger. Large families are very often exposed to absolute want; and
as the parents have almost unlimited authority over their children,
it frequently happens, in all parts of Africa, that some of the latter
are sold to purchase provisions for the rest of the family. When
I was at Jarra, Daman Jumma pointed out to me three young slaves
which he had purchased in this manner. I have already related another
instance which I saw at Wonda; and I was informed that in Fooladoo,
at that time, it was a very common practice.

The third cause of slavery, is _insolvency_. Of all the offences
(if insolvency may be so called), to which the laws of Africa have
affixed the punishment of slavery, this is the most common. A Negro
trader commonly contracts debts on some mercantile speculation,
either from his neighbours, to purchase such articles as will sell
to advantage in a distant market, or from the European traders on
the Coast; payment to be made in a given time. In both cases, the
situation of the adventurer is exactly the same. If he succeeds,
he may secure an independency. If he is unsuccessful, his person and
services are at the disposal of another; for in Africa, not only the
effects of the insolvent, but even the insolvent himself, is sold to
satisfy the lawful demands of his creditors.[22]

The fourth cause above enumerated, is _the commission of crimes,
on which the laws of the country affix slavery as a punishment_. In
Africa, the only offences of this class, are murder, adultery, and
witchcraft; and I am happy to say, that they did not appear to me to be
common. In cases of murder, I was informed, that the nearest relation
of the deceased had it in his power, after conviction, either to kill
the offender with his own hand, or sell him into slavery. When adultery
occurs, it is generally left to the option of the person injured,
either to sell the culprit, or accept such a ransom for him, as he
may think equivalent to the injury he has sustained. By witchcraft,
is meant pretended magic, by which the lives or healths of persons are
affected: in other words, it is the administering of poison. No trial
for this offence, however, came under my observation while I was in
Africa; and I therefore suppose that the crime, and its punishment,
occur but very seldom.

When a free man has become a slave by any one of the causes before
mentioned, he generally continues so for life, and his children
(if they are born of an enslaved mother) are brought up in the same
state of servitude. There are however a few instances of slaves
obtaining their freedom, and sometimes even with the consent of
their masters; as by performing some singular piece of service,
or by going to battle, and bringing home two slaves as a ransome;
but the common way of regaining freedom is by escape, and when slaves
have once set their minds on running away, they often succeed. Some
of them will wait for years before an opportunity presents itself,
and during that period shew no signs of discontent. In general,
it may be remarked, that slaves who come from a hilly country,
and have been much accustomed to hunting and travel, are more apt
to attempt their escape, than such as are born in a flat country,
and have been employed in cultivating the land.

Such are the general outlines of that system of slavery which prevails
in Africa; and it is evident, from its nature and extent, that it is
a system of no modern date. It probably had its origin in the remote
ages of antiquity, before the Mahomedans explored a path across the
Desert. How far it is maintained and supported by the slave traffic,
which, for two hundred years, the nations of Europe have carried on
with the natives of the Coast, it is neither within my province,
nor in my power, to explain. If my sentiments should be required
concerning the effect which a discontinuance of that commerce would
produce on the manners of the natives, I should have no hesitation in
observing, that, in the present unenlightened state of their minds,
my opinion is, the effect would neither be so extensive or beneficial,
as many wise and worthy persons fondly expect.


[Footnote 20: In time of famine, the master is permitted to sell one or
more of his domestics, to purchase provisions for his family; and in
case of the master’s insolvency, the domestic slaves are sometimes
seized upon by the creditors; and if the master cannot redeem them,
they are liable to be sold for payment of his debts. These are the
only cases that I recollect, in which the domestic slaves are liable
to be sold, without any misconduct or demerit of their own.]

[Footnote 21: This is a large spreading tree (a species of _sterculia_)
under which the Bentang is commonly placed.]

[Footnote 22: When a Negro takes up goods on credit from any of
the Europeans on the Coast, and does not make payment at the time
appointed, the European is authorized, by the laws of the country,
to seize upon the debtor himself, if he can find him; or it he cannot
be found, on any person of his family; or, in the last resort, on _any
native of the same kingdom_. The person thus seized on, is detained
while his friends are sent in quest of the debtor. When he is found,
a meeting is called of the chief people of the place, and the debtor
is compelled to ransom his friend by fulfilling his engagements. If he
is unable to do this, his person is immediately secured and sent down
to the Coast, and the other released. If the debtor cannot be found,
the person seized on is obliged to pay double the amount of the debt,
or is himself sold into slavery. I was given to understand, however,
that this part of the law is seldom enforced.]




                             CHAPTER XXIII.                             

_Of Gold-dust, and the Manner in which it is collected. — Process
of Washing it. — Its Value in Africa. — Of Ivory. — Surprise of
the Negroes at the Eagerness of the Europeans for this Commodity. —
Scattered Teeth frequently picked up in the Woods. — Mode of Hunting
the Elephant. — Some Reflections on the unimproved State of the
Country, &c._


Those valuable commodities, gold and ivory (the next objects of our
inquiry) have probably been found in Africa from the first ages of
the world. They are reckoned among its most important productions in
the earliest records of its history.

It has been observed, that gold is seldom or never discovered, except
in _mountainous_ and _barren_ countries: Nature, it is said, thus
making amends in one way, for her penuriousness in the other. This,
however, is not wholly true. Gold is found in considerable quantities
throughout every part of Manding; a country which is indeed hilly,
but cannot properly be called _mountainous_, much less _barren_. It is
also found in great plenty in Jallonkadoo (particularly about Boori),
another hilly, but by no means an infertile country. It is remarkable,
that in the place last mentioned (Boori), which is situated about
four days’ journey to the south-west of Kamalia, the salt market is
often supplied, at the same time, with rock-salt from the Great Desert,
and sea-salt from the Rio Grande; the price of each, at this distance
from its source, being nearly the same; and the dealers in each,
whether Moors from the north, or Negroes from the west, are invited
thither by the same motives, that of bartering their salt for gold.

The gold of Manding, so far as I could learn, is never found in any
matrix or vein, but always in small grains, nearly in a pure state,
from the size of a pin’s head, to that of a pea; scattered through
a large body of sand or clay; and in this state, it is called by the
Mandingoes _sanoo munko_, “gold powder.” It is, however, extremely
probable, by what I could learn of the situation of the ground, that,
most of it has originally been washed down by repeated torrents
from the neighbouring hills. The manner in which it is collected,
is nearly as follows:

About the beginning of December, when the harvest is over, and the
streams and torrents have greatly subsided, the Mansa, or chief of the
town, appoints a day to begin _sanoo koo_, “gold washing;” and the
women are sure to have themselves in readiness by the time appointed. A
paddle, or spade, for digging up the sand, two or three calabashes
for washing it in, and a few quills for containing the gold dust, are
all the implements necessary for the purpose. On the morning of their
departure, a bullock is killed for the first day’s entertainment,
and a number of prayers and charms are used to ensure success; for
a failure on that day, is thought a bad omen. The Mansa of Kamalia,
with fourteen of his people, were I remember so much disappointed in
their first day’s washing, that very few of them had resolution to
persevere; and the few that did, had but very indifferent success;
which indeed, is not much to be wondered at; for instead of opening
some untried place, they continued to dig and wash in the same spot
where they had dug and washed for years; and where, of course, but
few large grains could be left.

The washing the sands of the streams, is by far the easiest way of
obtaining the gold-dust; but in most places the sands have been so
narrowly searched before, that unless the stream takes some new course,
the gold is found but in small quantities. While some of the party
are busied in washing the sands, others employ themselves farther up
the torrent, where the rapidity of the stream has carried away all the
clay, sand, &c. and left nothing but small pebbles. The search among
these is a very troublesome task. I have seen women who have had the
skin worn off the tops of their fingers in this employment. Sometimes,
however, they are rewarded by finding pieces of gold, which they call
_sanoo birro_, “gold stones,” that amply repay them for their
trouble. A woman and her daughter, inhabitants of Kamalia, found in
one day two pieces of this kind; one of five drachms, and the other
of three drachms weight. But the most certain and profitable mode of
washing, is practised in the height of the dry season, by digging
a deep pit, like a draw-well, near some hill which has previously
been discovered to contain gold. The pit is dug with small spades or
corn paddles, and the earth is drawn up in large calabashes. As the
Negroes dig through the different strata of clay or sand, a calabash
or two of each is washed, by way of experiment; and in this manner
the labourers proceed, until they come to a stratum containing gold;
or until they are obstructed by rocks, or inundated by water. In
general, when they come to a stratum of fine reddish sand, with small
black specks therein, they find gold, in some proportion or other,
and send up large calabashes full of the sand, for the women to wash;
for though the pit is dug by the men, the gold is always washed by the
women, who are accustomed from their infancy to a similar operation,
in separating the husks of corn from the meal.

As I never descended into any one of these pits, I cannot say in what
manner they are worked under ground. Indeed, the situation in which
I was placed, made it necessary for me to be cautious not to incur
the suspicion of the natives, by examining too far into the riches of
their country; but the manner of separating the gold from the sand,
is very simple, and is frequently performed by the women in the middle
of the town; for when the searchers return from the valleys in the
evening, they commonly bring with them each a calabash or two of sand,
to be washed by such of the females as remain at home. The operation
is simply as follows.

A portion of sand or clay (for the gold is sometimes found in a
brown coloured clay), is put into a large calabash, and mixed with
a sufficient quantity of water. The woman, whose office it is, then
shakes the calabash in such a manner, as to mix the sand and water
together, and give the whole a rotatory motion; at first gently,
but afterwards more quick, until a small portion of sand and water,
at every revolution, flies over the brim of the calabash. The sand
thus separated, is only the coarsest particles mixed with a little
muddy water. After the operation has been continued for some time,
the sand is allowed to subside, and the water poured off; a portion of
coarse sand which is now uppermost in the calabash, is removed by the
hand, and fresh water being added, the operation is repeated until the
water comes off almost pure. The woman now takes a second calabash, and
shakes the sand and water gently from the one to the other, reserving
that portion of sand which is next the bottom of the calabash, and
which is most likely to contain the gold. This small quantity is
mixed with some pure water, and being moved about in the calabash,
is carefully examined. If a few particles of gold are picked out,
the contents of the other calabash are examined in the same manner;
but, in general, the party is well contented, if she can obtain three
or four grains from the contents of both calabashes. Some women,
however, by long practice, become so well acquainted with the nature
of the sand, and the mode of washing it, that they will collect gold,
where others cannot find a single particle. The gold dust is kept in
quills, stopt up with cotton; and the washers are fond of displaying
a number of these quills in their hair. Generally speaking, if a
person uses common diligence, in a proper soil, it is supposed that
as much gold may be collected by him in the course of the dry season,
as is equal to the value of two slaves.

Thus simple is the process by which the Negroes obtain gold in Manding;
and it is evident, from this account, that the country contains a
considerable portion of this precious metal; for many of the smaller
particles must necessarily escape the observation of the naked eye; and
as the natives generally search the sands of streams at a considerable
distance from the hills, and consequently far removed from the mines
where the gold was originally produced, the labourers are sometimes
but ill paid for their trouble. Minute particles only, of this heavy
metal, can be carried by the current to any considerable distance; the
larger must remain deposited near the original source from whence they
came. Were the gold-bearing streams to be traced to their fountains;
and the hills from whence they spring, properly examined, the sand in
which the gold is there deposited would, no doubt, be found to contain
particles of a much larger size;[23] and even the small grains might
be collected to considerable advantage by the use of quicksilver, and
other improvements, with which the natives are at present unacquainted.

Part of this gold is converted into ornaments for the women, but,
in general, these ornaments are more to be admired for their weight,
than their workmanship. They are massy and inconvenient, particularly
the ear-rings, which are commonly so heavy as to pull down and lacerate
the lobe of the ear; to avoid which they are supported by a thong of
red leather, which passes over the crown of the head from one ear
to the other. The necklace displays greater fancy; and the proper
arrangement of the different beads and plates of gold, is the great
criterion of taste and elegance. When a lady of consequence is in
full dress, her gold ornaments may be worth altogether, from fifty
to eighty pounds sterling.

A small quantity of gold is likewise employed by the Slatees, in
defraying the expences of their journies to and from the Coast;
but by far the greater proportion is annually carried away by the
Moors in exchange for salt, and other merchandize. During my stay at
Kamalia, the gold collected by the different traders at that place,
for salt alone, was nearly equal to one hundred and ninety-eight
pounds sterling; and as Kamalia is but a small town, and not much
resorted to by the trading Moors, this quantity must have borne a
very small proportion to the gold collected at Kancaba, Kankaree, and
some other large towns. The value of salt in this part of Africa is
very great. One slab, about two feet and a half in length, fourteen
inches in breadth, and two inches in thickness, will sometimes sell
for about two pounds ten shillings sterling, and from one pound
fifteen shillings, to two pounds, may be considered as the common
price. Four of these slabs are considered as a load for an ass,
and six for a bullock. The value of European merchandize in Manding
varies very much, according to the supply from the Coast, or the dread
of war in the country; but the return for such articles is commonly
made in slaves. The price of a prime slave when I was at Kamalia,
was from _nine_ to _twelve_ minkallies, and European commodities had
then nearly the following value:

  18 gun flints,            }
                            }
  48 leaves of tobacco,     }
                            } one minkalli.
  20 charges of gunpowder,  }
                            }
     A cutlass,             }

     A musket, from three to four minkallies.

The produce of the country, and the different necessaries of life,
when exchanged for gold, sold as follows:

Common provisions for one day, the weight of one _teelee-kissi_
(a black bean, six of which make the weight of one minkalli;)—a
chicken, one teelee-kissi—a sheep three teelee-kissi—a bullock
one minkalli—a horse from ten to seventeen minkallies.

The Negroes weigh the gold in small balances, which they always
carry about them. They make no difference in point of value,
between gold dust and wrought gold. In bartering one article for
another, the person who receives the gold, always weighs it with his
own teelee-kissi. These beans are sometimes fraudulently soaked in
Shea-butter, to make them heavy; and I once saw a pebble ground exactly
into the form of one of them; but such practices are not very common.

Having now related the substance of what occurs to my recollection
concerning the African mode of obtaining gold from the earth, and its
value in barter, I proceed to the next article, of which I proposed
to treat, namely, _ivory_.

Nothing creates a greater surprise among the Negroes on the sea
coast, than the eagerness displayed by the European traders to
procure elephants’ teeth; it being exceedingly difficult to make
them comprehend to what use it is applied. Although they are shewn
knives with ivory hafts, combs, and toys of the same material,
and are convinced that the ivory thus manufactured, was originally
parts of a tooth, they are not satisfied. They suspect that this
commodity is more frequently converted in Europe, to purposes of far
greater importance; the true nature of which is studiously concealed
from them, lest the price of ivory should be enhanced. They cannot,
they say, easily persuade themselves, that ships would be built,
and voyages undertaken, to procure an article, which had no other
value than that of furnishing handles to knives, &c. when pieces of
wood would answer the purpose equally well.

Elephants are very numerous in the interior of Africa, but they appear
to be a distinct species from those found in Asia. Blumenbach, in
his figures of objects of natural history, has given good drawings
of a grinder of each; and the variation is evident. M. Cuvier also
has given, in the _Magazin Encyclopedique_, a clear account of the
difference between them. As I never examined the Asiatic elephant,
I have chosen rather to refer to those writers, than advance this
as an opinion of my own. It has been said, that the African elephant
is of a less docile nature than the Asiatic, and incapable of being
tamed. The Negroes certainly do not at present tame them; but when
we consider that the Carthaginians had always tame elephants in
their armies, and actually transported some of them to Italy in the
course of the Punic wars; it seems more likely that they should have
possessed the art of taming their own elephants, than have submitted
to the expence of bringing such vast animals from Asia. Perhaps,
the barbarous practice of hunting the African elephants for the sake
of their teeth, has rendered them more untractable and savage, than
they were found to be in former times.

The greater part of the ivory which is sold on the Gambia, and Senegal
rivers, is brought from the interior country. The lands towards
the Coast are too swampy, and too much intersected with creeks and
rivers, for so bulky an animal as the elephant to travel through,
without being discovered; and when once the natives discern the
marks of his feet in the earth, the whole village is up in arms. The
thoughts of feasting on his flesh, making sandals of his hide, and
selling the teeth to the Europeans, inspire every one with courage;
and the animal seldom escapes from his pursuers; but in the plains
of Bambarra and Kaarta, and the extensive wilds of Jallonkadoo,
the elephants are very numerous; and, from the great scarcity of
gunpowder in those districts, they are less annoyed by the natives.

Scattered teeth are frequently picked up in the woods, and travellers
are very diligent in looking for them. It is a common practice with
the elephant, to thrust his teeth under the roots of such shrubs and
bushes as grow in the more dry and elevated parts of the country, where
the soil is shallow. These bushes he easily overturns, and feeds on
the roots, which are, in general, more tender and juicy than the hard
woody branches, or the foliage; but when the teeth are partly decayed
by age, and the roots more firmly fixed, the great exertions of the
animal, in this practice, frequently causes them to break short. At
Kamalia I saw two teeth; one, a very large one; which were found in
the woods, and which were evidently broken off in this manner. Indeed
it is difficult otherwise to account for such a large proportion of
broken ivory, as is daily offered for sale, at the different factories;
for when the elephant is killed in hunting, unless he dashes himself
over a precipice, the teeth are always extracted entire.

There are certain seasons of the year when the elephants collect into
large herds, and traverse the country in quest of food or water;
and as all that part of the country to the north of the Niger, is
destitute of rivers, whenever the pools in the woods are dried up,
the elephants approach towards the banks of that river. Here, they
continue until the commencement of the rainy season, in the months
of June or July; and during this time they are much hunted by such of
the Bambarrans as have gunpowder to spare. The elephant hunters seldom
go out singly: a party of four or five join together; and having each
furnished himself with powder and ball, and a quantity of corn-meal in
a leather bag, sufficient for five or six days provision, they enter
the most unfrequented parts of the wood, and examine with great care
every thing that can lead to the discovery of the elephants. In this
pursuit, notwithstanding the bulk of the animal, very great nicety of
observation is required. The broken branches, the scattered dung of the
animal, and the marks of his feet, are carefully inspected; and many
of the hunters have, by long experience and attentive observation,
become so expert in their search, that as soon as they observe the
footmarks of an elephant, they will tell almost to a certainty at
what time it passed, and at what distance it will be found.

When they discover a herd of elephants, they follow them at a distance,
until they perceive some one stray from the rest, and come into
such a situation as to be fired at, with advantage. The hunters then
approach with great caution, creeping amongst the long grass, until
they have got near enough to be sure of their aim. They then discharge
all their pieces at once, and throw themselves on their faces among
the grass. The wounded elephant immediately applies his trunk to the
different wounds, but being unable to extract the balls, and seeing
nobody near him, becomes quite furious, and runs about amongst the
bushes, until by fatigue and loss of blood he has exhausted himself,
and affords the hunters an opportunity of firing a second time at him,
by which he is generally brought to the ground.

The skin is now taken off, and extended on the ground with pegs,
to dry; and such parts of the flesh as are most esteemed, are cut up
into thin slices, and dried in the sun, to serve for provisions on some
future occasion. The teeth are struck out with a light hatchet, which
the hunters always carry along with them; not only for that purpose,
but also to enable them to cut down such trees as contain honey;
for though they carry with them only five or six days provisions,
they will remain in the woods for months, if they are successful;
and support themselves upon the flesh of such elephants as they kill,
and wild honey.

The ivory thus collected, is seldom brought down to the Coast by the
hunters themselves. They dispose of it to the itinerant merchants, who
come annually from the Coast with arms and ammunition, to purchase this
valuable commodity. Some of these merchants will collect ivory in the
course of one season, sufficient to load four or five asses. A great
quantity of ivory is likewise brought from the interior, by the slave
coffles; there are, however, some Slatees, of the Mahomedan persuasion,
who, from motives of religion, will not deal in ivory; nor eat of
the flesh of the elephant, unless it has been killed with a spear.

The quantity of ivory collected in this part of Africa, is not so
great, nor are the teeth in general so large as in the countries nearer
the Line: few of them weigh more than eighty, or one hundred pounds;
and, upon an average, a bar of European merchandise may be reckoned
as the price of a pound of ivory.

I have now, I trust, in this and the preceding Chapters, explained
with sufficient minuteness, the nature and extent of the commercial
connection which at present prevails, and has long subsisted, between
the Negro natives of those parts of Africa which I visited, and
the nations of Europe; and it appears, that slaves, gold, and ivory,
together with the few articles enumerated in the beginning of my work,
_viz._ bees-wax and honey, hides, gums, and dye woods, constitute
the whole catalogue of exportable commodities. Other productions,
however, have been incidentally noticed as the growth of Africa;
such as grain of different kinds, tobacco, indigo, cotton-wool, and
perhaps a few others; but of all these (which can only be obtained by
cultivation and labour), the natives raise sufficient only for their
own immediate expenditure; nor, under the present system of their laws,
manners, trade and government, can any thing farther be expected from
them. It cannot, however, admit of a doubt, that all the rich and
valuable productions, both of the East and West Indies, might easily
be naturalized, and brought to the utmost perfection, in the tropical
parts of this immense continent. Nothing is wanting to this end,
but example, to enlighten the minds of the natives; and instruction,
to enable them to direct their industry to proper objects. It was not
possible for me to behold the wonderful fertility of the soil, the
vast herds of cattle, proper both for labour and food, and a variety
of other circumstances favourable to colonization and agriculture;
and reflect, withal, on the means which presented themselves of a vast
inland navigation, without lamenting that a country, so abundantly
gifted and favoured by nature, should remain in its present savage
and neglected state. Much more did I lament, that a people of manners
and dispositions so gentle and benevolent, should either be left as
they now are, immersed in the gross and uncomfortable blindness of
pagan superstition, or permitted to become converts to a system of
bigotry and fanaticism; which, without enlightening the mind, often
debases the heart. On this subject many observations might be made;
but the reader will probably think that I have already digressed too
largely; and I now, therefore, return to my situation at Kamalia.


[Footnote 23: I am informed that the gold mine, as it is called,
in Wicklow, in Ireland, which was discovered in the year 1795, is
near the top, and upon the steep slope, of a mountain. Here, pieces
of gold of several ounces weight were frequently found. What would
have been gold-dust two miles below, was here golden gravel; that is,
each grain was like a small pebble in size, and one piece was found
which weighed near twenty-two ounces troy.]




                             CHAPTER XXIV.                              

_Transactions at Kamalia resumed. — Arabic MSS. in Use among
the Mahomedan Negroes. — Reflections concerning the Conversion
and Education of the Negro Children. — Return of the Author’s
Benefactor,_ KARFA. — _Further Account of the Purchase and Treatment
of Slaves. — Fast of Rhamadan, how observed by the Negroes. —
Author’s anxiety for the Day of Departure. — The Caravan sets
out — Account of it on its Departure, and Proceedings on the Road,
until its arrival at Kinytakooro._


The schoolmaster, to whose care I was entrusted during the absence of
Karfa, was a man of a mild disposition, and gentle manners; his name
was Fankooma; and although he himself adhered strictly to the religion
of Mahomet, he was by no means intolerant in his principles towards
others who differed from him. He spent much of his time in reading;
and teaching appeared to be his pleasure, as well as employment. His
school consisted of seventeen boys, most of whom were sons of Kafirs;
and two girls, one of whom was Karfa’s own daughter. The girls
received their instructions in the day time, but the boys always had
their lessons by the light of a large fire before daybreak, and again
late in the evening; for being considered, during their scholarship, as
the domestic slaves of the master, they were employed in planting corn,
bringing fire-wood, and in other servile offices, through the day.

Exclusive of the Koran, and a book or two of commentaries thereon, the
schoolmaster possessed a variety of manuscripts, which had partly been
purchased from the trading Moors, and partly borrowed from Bushreens
in the neighbourhood, and copied with great care. Other MSS. had
been produced to me at different places in the course of my journey;
and on recounting those I had before seen, and those which were now
shewn to me, and interrogating the schoolmaster on the subject, I
discovered that the Negroes are in possession (among others), of an
Arabic version of the Pentateuch of Moses, which they call _Taureta
la Moosa_. This is so highly esteemed, that it is often sold for
the value of one prime slave. They have likewise a version of the
Psalms of David (_Zabora Dawidi_); and, lastly, the book of Isaiah,
which they call _Lingeeli la Isa_, and it is in very high esteem. I
suspect, indeed, that in all these copies, there are interpolations
of some of the peculiar tenets of Mahomet, for I could distinguish
in many passages the name of the Prophet. It is possible, however,
that this circumstance might otherwise have been accounted for, if my
knowledge of the Arabic had been more extensive. By means of those
books, many of the converted Negroes have acquired an acquaintance
with some of the remarkable events recorded in the Old Testament. The
account of our first parents; the death of Abel; the deluge; the lives
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the story of Joseph and his brethren;
the history of Moses, David, Solomon, &c. All these have been related
to me in the Mandingo language, with tolerable exactness, by different
people; and my surprise was not greater on hearing these accounts
from the lips of the Negroes, than theirs, on finding that I was
already acquainted with them; for although the Negroes in general
have a very great idea of the wealth and power of the Europeans,
I am afraid that the Mahomedan converts among them, think but very
lightly of our superior attainments in religious knowledge. The white
traders in the maritime districts, take no pains to counteract this
unhappy prejudice; always performing their own devotions in secret,
and seldom condescending to converse with the Negroes in a friendly
and instructive manner. To me, therefore, it was not so much the
subject of wonder, as matter of regret, to observe, that while the
superstition of Mahomet has, in this manner, scattered a few faint
beams of learning among these poor people, the precious light of
Christianity is altogether excluded. I could not but lament, that
although the Coast of Africa has now been known and frequented by
the Europeans for more than two hundred years, yet the Negroes still
remain entire strangers to the doctrines of our holy religion. We are
anxious to draw from obscurity the opinions and records of antiquity,
the beauties of Arabian and Asiatic literature, &c.; but while our
libraries are thus stored with the learning of various countries,
we distribute with a parsimonious hand, the blessings of religious
truth, to the benighted nations of the earth. The natives of Asia
derive but little advantage in this respect from an intercourse
with us; and even the poor Africans, whom we affect to consider as
barbarians, look upon us, I fear, as little better than a race of
formidable but ignorant heathens. When I produced Richardson’s
Arabic grammar to some Slatees on the Gambia, they were astonished
to think that any European should understand, and write, the sacred
language of their religion. At first, they suspected that it might
have been written by some of the slaves carried from the Coast; but,
on a closer examination, they were satisfied that no Bushreen could
write such beautiful Arabic; and one of them offered to give me an ass,
and sixteen bars of goods, if I would part with the book. Perhaps,
a short and easy introduction to Christianity, such as is found in
some of the catechisms for children, elegantly printed in Arabic, and
distributed on different parts of the Coast, might have a wonderful
effect. The expence would be but trifling; curiosity would induce many
to read it; and the evident superiority which it would possess over
their present manuscripts, both in point of elegance and cheapness,
might at last obtain it a place among the school books of Africa.

The reflections which I have thus ventured to submit to my readers on
this important subject, naturally suggested themselves to my mind,
on perceiving the encouragement which was thus given to learning,
(such as it is,) in many parts of Africa. I have observed, that the
pupils at Kamalia were most of them the children of Pagans; their
parents, therefore, could have had no predilection for the doctrines
of Mahomet. Their aim was their children’s improvement; and if a
more enlightened system had presented itself, it would probably have
been preferred. The children, too, wanted not a spirit of emulation;
which it is the aim of the tutor to encourage. When any one of them
has read through the Koran, and performed a certain number of public
prayers, a feast is prepared by the schoolmaster, and the scholar
undergoes an examination, or (in European terms,) _takes out his
degree_. I attended at three different inaugurations of this sort,
and heard with pleasure, the distinct and intelligent answers which
the scholars frequently gave to the Bushreens, who assembled on those
occasions, and acted as examiners. When the Bushreens had satisfied
themselves respecting the learning and abilities of the scholar,
the last page of the Koran was put into his hand, and he was desired
to read it aloud: after the boy had finished this lesson, he pressed
the paper against his forehead, and pronounced the word _Amen_; upon
which all the Bushreens rose, and shaking him cordially by the hand,
bestowed upon him the title of Bushreen.

When a scholar has undergone this examination, his parents are informed
that he has completed his education, and that it is incumbent on
them to redeem their son, by giving to the schoolmaster a slave,
or the price of a slave, in exchange; which is always done, if the
parents can afford to do it; if not, the boy remains the domestic
slave of the schoolmaster until he can, by his own industry, collect
goods sufficient to ransome himself.

About a week after the departure of Karfa, three Moors arrived at
Kamalia with a considerable quantity of salt, and other merchandize,
which they had obtained on credit, from a merchant of Fezzan, who had
lately arrived at Kancaba. Their engagement was to pay him his price
when the goods were sold, which they expected would be in the course
of a month. Being rigid Bushreens, they were accommodated with two
of Karfa’s huts, and sold their goods to very great advantage.

On the 24th of January, Karfa returned to Kamalia with a number of
people, and thirteen prime slaves which he had purchased. He likewise
brought with him a young girl whom he had married at Kancaba, as his
fourth wife, and had given her parents three prime slaves for her. She
was kindly received at the door of the baloon by Karfa’s other
wives, who conducted their new acquaintance and co-partner into one
of the best huts, which they had caused to be swept and white-washed,
on purpose to receive her.[24]

My clothes were by this time become so very ragged, that I was almost
ashamed to appear out of doors; but Karfa, on the day after his
arrival, generously presented me with such a garment and trowsers,
as are commonly worn in the country.

The slaves which Karfa had brought with him were all of them prisoners
of war; they had been taken by the Bambarran army in the kingdoms
of Wassela and Kaarta, and carried to Sego, where some of them had
remained three years in irons. From Sego they were sent, in company
with a number of other captives, up the Niger in two large canoes, and
offered for sale at Yamina, Bammakoo, and Kancaba; at which places
the greater number of the captives were bartered for gold-dust,
and the remainder sent forward to Kankaree.

Eleven of them confessed to me that they had been slaves from their
infancy; but the other two refused to give any account of their
former condition. They were all very inquisitive; but they viewed me
at first with looks of horror, and repeatedly asked if my countrymen
were cannibals. They were very desirous to know what became of the
slaves after they had crossed the salt water. I told them, that they
were employed in cultivating the land; but they would not believe me;
and one of them putting his hand upon the ground, said with great
simplicity, “have you really got such ground as this, to set your
feet upon?” A deeply rooted idea, that the whites purchase Negroes
for the purpose of devouring them, or of selling them to others,
that they may be devoured hereafter, naturally makes the slaves
contemplate a journey towards the Coast with great terror; insomuch
that the Slatees are forced to keep them constantly in irons, and
watch them very closely, to prevent their escape. They are commonly
secured, by putting the right leg of one, and the left of another, into
the same pair of fetters. By supporting the fetters with a string,
they can walk, though very slowly. Every four slaves are likewise
fastened together by the necks, with a strong rope of twisted thongs;
and in the night, an additional pair of fetters is put on their hands,
and sometimes a light iron chain passed round their necks.

Such of them as evince marks of discontent, are secured in a different
manner. A thick billet of wood is cut about three feet long, and a
smooth notch being made upon one side of it, the ankle of the slave is
bolted to the smooth part by means of a strong iron staple, one prong
of which passes on each side of the ankle. All these fetters and bolts
are made from native iron; in the present case they were put on by the
blacksmith as soon as the slaves arrived from Kancaba, and were not
taken off until the morning on which the coffle departed for Gambia.

In other respects, the treatment of the slaves during their stay
at Kamalia, was far from being harsh or cruel. They were led out in
their fetters, every morning, to the shade of the tamarind tree, where
they were encouraged to play at games of hazard, and sing diverting
songs, to keep up their spirits; for though some of them sustained the
hardships of their situation with amazing fortitude, the greater part
were very much dejected, and would sit all day in a sort of sullen
melancholy, with their eyes fixed upon the ground. In the evening,
their irons were examined, and their hand fetters put on; after which
they were conducted into two large huts, where they were guarded during
the night by Karfa’s domestic slaves. But notwithstanding all this,
about a week after their arrival, one of the slaves had the address to
procure a small knife, with which he opened the rings of his fetters,
cut the rope, and made his escape: more of them would probably have
got off, had they assisted each other; but the slave no sooner found
himself at liberty, than he refused to stop, and assist in breaking
the chain which was fastened round the necks of his companions.

As all the Slatees and slaves belonging to the coffle were now
assembled, either at Kamalia, or at some of the neighbouring villages,
it might have been expected that we should have set out immediately
for Gambia; but though the day of our departure was frequently fixed,
it was always found expedient to change it. Some of the people had
not prepared their dry provisions; others had gone to visit their
relations, or collect some trifling debts; and, last of all, it was
necessary to consult whether the day would be a lucky one. On account
of one of these, or other such causes, our departure was put off, day
after day, until the month of February was far advanced; after which
all the Slatees agreed to remain in their present quarters, until
the _fast moon was over_. And here I may remark, that loss of time,
is an object of no great importance in the eyes of a Negro. If he has
any thing of consequence to perform, it is a matter of indifference to
him whether he does it to-day or to-morrow, or a month or two hence:
so long as he can spend the present moment with any degree of comfort,
he gives himself very little concern about the future.

The fast of Rhamadan was observed with great strictness, by all the
Bushreens; but, instead of compelling me to follow their example, as
the Moors did on a similar occasion, Karfa frankly told me that I was
at liberty to pursue my own inclination. In order, however, to manifest
a respect for their religious opinions, I voluntarily fasted three
days, which was thought sufficient to screen me from the reproachful
epithet of Kafir. During the fast, all the Slatees belonging to
the coffle assembled every morning in Karfa’s house, where the
schoolmaster read to them some religious lessons, from a large folio
volume, the author of which was an Arab, of the name of _Sheiffa_. In
the evening, such of the women as had embraced Mahomedanism assembled,
and said their prayers publicly at the Misura. They were all dressed
in white, and went through the different prostrations, prescribed by
their religion, with becoming solemnity. Indeed, during the whole fast
of Rhamadan, the Negroes behaved themselves with the greatest meekness
and humility; forming a striking contrast to the savage intolerance
and brutal bigotry, which at this period characterize the Moors.

When the fast month was almost at an end, the Bushreens assembled
at the Misura, to watch for the appearance of the new moon; but the
evening being rather cloudy, they were for some time disappointed,
and a number of them had gone home with a resolution to fast another
day, when on a sudden this delightful object showed her sharp horns
from behind a cloud, and was welcomed with the clapping of hands,
beating of drums, firing muskets, and other marks of rejoicing. As
this moon is reckoned extremely lucky, Karfa gave orders that all
the people belonging to the coffle should immediately pack up their
dry provisions, and hold themselves in readiness; and on the 16th
of April, the Slatees held a consultation, and fixed on the 19th of
the same month, as the day on which the coffle should depart from
Kamalia. This resolution freed me from much uneasiness; for our
departure had already been so long deferred, that I was apprehensive
it might still be put off until the commencement of the rainy season;
and although Karfa behaved towards me with the greatest kindness,
I found my situation very unpleasant. The Slatees were unfriendly
to me; and the trading Moors, who were at this time at Kamalia,
continued to plot mischief against me, from the first day of their
arrival. Under these circumstances, I reflected, that my life in a
great measure depended on the good opinion of an individual, who was
daily hearing malicious stories concerning the Europeans; and I could
hardly expect that he would always judge with impartiality between me
and his countrymen. Time had, indeed, reconciled me, in some degree,
to their mode of life; and a smoky hut, or a scanty supper, gave me
no great uneasiness; but I became at last wearied out with a constant
state of alarm and anxiety, and felt a painful longing for the manifold
blessings of civilized society.

On the morning of the 17th, a circumstance occurred, which wrought
a considerable change in my favour. The three trading Moors, who had
lodged under Karfa’s protection, ever since their arrival at Kamalia,
and had gained the esteem of all the Bushreens, by an appearance of
great sanctity, suddenly packed up their effects, and, without once
thanking Karfa for his kindness towards them, marched over the hills
to Bala. Every one was astonished at this unexpected removal; but the
affair was cleared up in the evening, by the arrival of the Fezzan
merchant from Kancaba (mentioned in p. 317); who assured Karfa, that
these Moors had borrowed all their salt and goods from him, and had
sent for him to come to Kamalia, and receive payment. When he was told
that they had fled to the westward, he wiped a tear from each eye with
the sleeve of his cloak, and exclaimed, “these _shirrukas_ (robbers)
are Mahomedans, but they are not men; they have robbed me of two
hundred minkallies.” From this merchant, I received information of
the capture of our Mediterranean convoy by the French, in October 1795.

April 19th. The long wished-for day of our departure was at length
arrived; and the Slatees having taken the irons from their slaves,
assembled with them at the door of Karfa’s house, where the bundles
were all tied up, and every one had his load assigned him. The coffle,
on its departure from Kamalia, consisted of twenty-seven slaves
for sale, the property of Karfa and four other Slatees; but we were
afterwards joined by five at Maraboo, and three at Bala; making in
all thirty-five slaves. The free men were fourteen in number, but
most of them had one or two wives, and some domestic slaves; and the
schoolmaster, who was now upon his return for Woradoo, the place of
his nativity, took with him eight of his scholars; so that the number
of free people and domestic slaves amounted to thirty-eight, and the
whole amount of the coffle was seventy-three. Among the free men were
six Jillakeas (singing men), whose musical talents were frequently
exerted either to divert our fatigue, or obtain us a welcome from
strangers. When we departed from Kamalia, we were followed for about
half a mile, by most of the inhabitants of the town, some of them
crying, and others shaking hands with their relations, who were now
about to leave them; and when we had gained a piece of rising ground,
from which we had a view of Kamalia, all the people belonging to
the coffle were ordered to sit down in one place, with their faces
towards the west, and the townspeople were desired to sit down in
another place, with their faces towards Kamalia. In this situation,
the schoolmaster, with two of the principal Slatees, having taken
their places between the two parties, pronounced a long and solemn
prayer; after which they walked three times round the coffle,
making an impression in the ground with the ends of their spears,
and muttering something by way of charm. When this ceremony was ended,
all the people belonging to the coffle sprang up, and without taking a
formal farewell of their friends, set forwards. As many of the slaves
had remained for years in irons, the sudden exertion of walking quick,
with heavy loads upon their heads, occasioned spasmodic contractions
of their legs; and we had not proceeded above a mile, before it was
found necessary to take two of them from the rope, and allow them to
walk more slowly until we reached Maraboo, a walled village, where
some people were waiting to join the coffle. Here we stopt about two
hours, to allow the strangers time to pack up their provisions, and
then continued our route to Bala, which town we reached about four in
the afternoon. The inhabitants of Bala, at this season of the year,
subsist chiefly on fish, which they take in great plenty from the
streams in the neighbourhood. We remained here until the afternoon of
the next day, the 20th, when we proceeded to Worumbang, the frontier
village of Manding towards Jallonkadoo. As we proposed shortly to
enter the Jallonka Wilderness, the people of this village furnished
us with great plenty of provisions; and on the morning of the 21st, we
entered the woods to the westward of Worumbang. After having travelled
some little way, a consultation was held, whether we should continue
our route through the Wilderness, or save one day’s provisions
by going to Kinytakooro, a town in Jallonkadoo. After debating the
matter for some time, it was agreed that we should take the road for
Kinytakooro; but as that town was a long day’s journey distant,
it was necessary to take some refreshment. Accordingly every person
opened his provision bag, and brought a handfull or two of meal, to
the place where Karfa and the Slatees were sitting. When every one had
brought his quota, and the whole was properly arranged in small gourd
shells, the schoolmaster offered up a short prayer; the substance of
which was, that God and the holy Prophet might preserve us from robbers
and all bad people, that our provisions might never fail us, nor our
limbs become fatigued. This ceremony being ended, every one partook
of the meal, and drank a little water; after which we set forward
(rather running than walking), until we came to the river Kokoro,
a branch of the Senegal, where we halted about ten minutes. The banks
of this river are very high; and from the grass and brushwood which
had been left by the stream, it was evident that at this place, the
water had risen more than twenty feet perpendicular, during the rainy
season. At this time it was only a small stream, such as would turn a
mill, swarming with fish; and on account of the number of crocodiles,
and the danger of being carried past the ford by the force of the
stream in the rainy season, it is called _Kokoro_ (dangerous). From
this place we continued to travel with the greatest expedition, and in
the afternoon crossed two small branches of the Kokoro. About sunset
we came in sight of Kinytakooro, a considerable town, nearly square,
situated in the middle of a large and well cultivated plain: before
we entered the town we halted, until the people who had fallen behind
came up. During this day’s travel, two slaves, a woman and a girl
belonging to a Slatee of Bala, were so much fatigued that they could
not keep up with the coffle; they were severely whipped, and dragged
along until about three o’clock in the afternoon, when they were
both affected with vomiting, by which it was discovered that they
had _eaten clay_. This practice is by no means uncommon amongst the
Negroes; but whether it arises from a vitiated appetite, or from a
settled intention to destroy themselves, I cannot affirm. They were
permitted to lie down in the woods, and three people remained with
them until they had rested themselves; but they did not arrive at
the town until past midnight; and were then so much exhausted, that
the Slatee gave up all thoughts of taking them across the woods in
their present condition, and determined to return with them to Bala,
and wait for another opportunity.

As this was the first town beyond the limits of Manding, greater
etiquette than usual was observed. Every person was ordered to keep
in his proper station, and we marched towards the town, in a sort
of procession, nearly as follows. In front, five or six singing men,
all of them belonging to the coffle; these were followed by the other
free people; then came the slaves fastened in the usual way by a rope
round their necks, four of them to a rope, and a man with a spear
between each four; after them came the domestic slaves, and in the
rear the women of free condition, wives of the Slatees, &c. In this
manner we proceeded, until we came within a hundred yards of the gate;
when the singing men began a loud song, well calculated to flatter the
vanity of the inhabitants, by extolling their known hospitality to
strangers, and their particular friendship for the Mandingoes. When
we entered the town we proceeded to the Bentang, where the people
gathered round us to hear our _dentegi_ (history); this was related
publicly by two of the singing men: they enumerated every little
circumstance which had happened to the coffle; beginning with the
events of the present day, and relating every thing, in a backward
series, until they reached Kamalia. When this history was ended, the
master of the town gave them a small present; and all the people of
the coffle, both free and enslaved, were invited, by some person or
other, and accommodated with lodging and provisions for the night.


[Footnote 24: The Negroes white-wash their huts with a mixture of
bone-ashes and water, to which is commonly added a little gum.]




                              CHAPTER XXV.                              

_The Coffle crosses the Jallonka Wilderness. — Miserable Fate of
one of the female Slaves; — arrives at Sooseeta; — proceeds to
Manna. — Some Account of the Jalonkas. — Crosses the main Stream
of the Senegal. — Bridge of a singular Construction. — Arrives
at Malacotta. — Remarkable Conduct of the King of the Jaloffs._


We continued at Kenytakooro until noon of the 22d of April,
when we removed to a village about seven miles to the westward;
the inhabitants of which being apprehensive of hostilities from the
Foulahs of Fooladoo, were at this time employed in constructing small
temporary huts among the rocks, on the side of a high hill close to
the village. The situation was almost impregnable, being every where
surrounded with high precipices, except on the eastern side, where
the natives had left a pathway sufficient to allow one person at a
time to ascend. Upon the brow of the hill, immediately over this path,
I observed several heaps of large loose stones, which the people told
me were intended to be thrown down upon the Foulahs, if they should
attempt the hill.

At daybreak, on the 23d, we departed from this village, and entered
the Jallonka Wilderness. We passed, in the course of the morning,
the ruins of two small towns, which had lately been burnt by the
Foulahs. The fire must have been very intense; for I observed that the
walls of many of the huts were slightly vitrified, and appeared at a
distance as if covered with a red varnish. About ten o’clock we came
to the river Wonda, which is somewhat larger than the river Kokoro;
but the stream was at this time rather muddy, which Karfa assured
me was occasioned by amazing shoals of fish. They were indeed seen
in all directions, and in such abundance, that I fancied the water
itself tasted and smelt fishy. As soon as we had crossed the river,
Karfa gave orders that all the people of the coffle should in future
keep close together, and travel in their proper station: the guides
and young men were accordingly placed in the van, the women and
slaves in the centre, and the free men in the rear. In this order,
we travelled with uncommon expedition, through a woody, but beautiful
country, interspersed with a pleasing variety of hill and dale, and
abounding with partridges, guinea-fowls, and deer, until sunset;
when we arrived at a most romantic stream called Co-meissang. My
arms and neck having been exposed to the sun during the whole day,
and irritated by the rubbing of my dress in walking, were now very
much inflamed and covered with blisters; and I was happy to embrace
the opportunity, while the coffle rested on the bank of this river,
to bathe myself in the stream. This practice, together with the
cool of the evening, much diminished the inflammation. About three
miles to the westward of the Co-meissang we halted in a thick wood,
and kindled our fires for the night. We were all, by this time, very
much fatigued; having, as I judged, travelled this day thirty miles;
but no person was heard to complain. Whilst supper was preparing,
Karfa made one of the slaves break some branches from the trees for
my bed. When we had finished our supper of kouskous, moistened with
some boiling water, and put the slaves in irons, we all lay down to
sleep; but we were frequently disturbed in the night by the howling
of wild beasts; and we found the small brown ants very troublesome.

April 24th. Before daybreak the Bushreens said their morning prayers,
and most of the free people drank a little _moening_ (a sort of gruel),
part of which was likewise given to such of the slaves as appeared
least able to sustain the fatigues of the day. One of Karfa’s female
slaves was very sulky, and when some gruel was offered to her, she
refused to drink it. As soon as day dawned we set out, and travelled
the whole morning over a wild and rocky country, by which my feet
were much bruised; and I was sadly apprehensive that I should not be
able to keep up with the coffle during the day; but I was, in a great
measure, relieved from this anxiety, when I observed that others
were more exhausted than myself. In particular, the woman slave,
who had refused victuals in the morning, began now to lag behind,
and complain dreadfully of pains in her legs. Her load was taken from
her, and given to another slave, and she was ordered to keep in the
front of the coffle. About eleven o’clock, as we were resting by
a small rivulet, some of the people discovered a hive of bees in a
hollow tree, and they were proceeding to obtain the honey, when the
largest swarm I ever beheld, flew out, and attacking the people of
the coffle, made us fly in all directions. I took the alarm first,
and I believe was the only person who escaped with impunity. When our
enemies thought fit to desist from pursuing us, and every person was
employed in picking out the stings he had received, it was discovered
that the poor woman abovementioned, whose name was Nealee, was not
come up; and as many of the slaves in their retreat had left their
bundles behind them, it became necessary for some persons to return,
and bring them. In order to do this with safety, fire was set to the
grass, a considerable way to the eastward of the hive, and the wind
driving the fire furiously along, the party pushed through the smoke,
and recovered the bundles. They likewise brought with them poor Nealee,
whom they found lying by the rivulet. She was very much exhausted,
and had crept to the stream, in hopes to defend herself from the
bees by throwing water over her body; but this proved ineffectual;
for she was stung in the most dreadful manner.

When the Slatees had picked out the stings as far as they could,
she was washed with water, and then rubbed with bruised leaves;
but the wretched woman obstinately refused to proceed any farther;
declaring, that she would rather die than walk another step. As
entreaties and threats were used in vain, the whip was at length
applied; and after bearing patiently a few strokes, she started up,
and walked with tolerable expedition for four or five hours longer,
when she made an attempt to run away from the coffle, but was so very
weak, that she fell down in the grass. Though she was unable to rise,
the whip was a second time applied, but without effect; upon which
Karfa desired two of the Slatees to place her upon the ass which
carried our dry provisions; but she could not sit erect; and the ass
being very refractory, it was found impossible to carry her forward
in that manner. The Slatees however were unwilling to abandon her,
the day’s journey being nearly ended: they therefore made a sort of
litter of bamboo canes, upon which she was placed, and tied on it with
slips of bark: this litter was carried upon the heads of two slaves,
one walking before the other, and they were followed by two others,
who relieved them occasionally. In this manner the woman was carried
forward until it was dark, when we reached a stream of water, at the
foot of a high hill called Gankaran-Kooro; and here we stopt for the
night, and set about preparing our supper. As we had only eat one
handful of meal since the preceding night, and travelled all day
in a hot sun, many of the slaves, who had loads upon their heads,
were very much fatigued; and some of them _snapt their fingers_,
which among the Negroes is a sure sign of desperation. The Slatees
immediately put them all in irons; and such of them as had evinced
signs of great despondency, were kept apart from the rest, and had
their hands tied. In the morning they were found greatly recovered.

April 25th. At daybreak poor Nealee was awakened; but her limbs were
now become so stiff and painful, that she could neither walk nor
stand; she was therefore lifted, like a corpse, upon the back of the
ass; and the Slatees endeavoured to secure her in that situation, by
fastening her hands together under the ass’s neck, and her feet under
the belly, with long slips of bark; but the ass was so very unruly,
that no sort of treatment could induce him to proceed with his load;
and as Nealee made no exertion to prevent herself from falling, she
was quickly thrown off, and had one of her legs much bruised. Every
attempt to carry her forward being thus found ineffectual, the general
cry of the coffle was, _kang-tegi, kang-tegi_, “cut her throat,
cut her throat;” an operation I did not wish to see performed,
and therefore marched onwards with the foremost of the coffle. I
had not walked above a mile, when one of Karfa’s domestic slaves
came up to me, with poor Nealee’s garment upon the end of his bow,
and exclaimed _Nealee affilita_ (Nealee is lost). I asked him whether
the Slatees had given him the garment, as a reward for cutting her
throat; he replied, that Karfa and the schoolmaster would not consent
to that measure, but had left her on the road; where undoubtedly she
soon perished, and was probably devoured by wild beasts.

The sad fate of this wretched woman, notwithstanding the outcry
beforementioned, made a strong impression on the minds of the whole
coffle, and the schoolmaster fasted the whole of the ensuing day, in
consequence of it. We proceeded in deep silence, and soon afterward
crossed the river Furkoomah, which was about as large as the river
Wonda. We now travelled with great expedition, every one being
apprehensive he might otherwise meet with the fate of poor Nealee. It
was however with great difficulty that I could keep up, although I
threw away my spear, and every thing that could in the least obstruct
me. About noon we saw a large herd of elephants, but they suffered us
to pass unmolested, and in the evening we halted near a thicket of
bamboo, but found no water; so that we were forced to proceed four
miles farther, to a small stream, where we stopt for the night. We
had marched this day, as I judged, about twenty-six miles.

April 26th. This morning two of the schoolmaster’s pupils complained
much of pains in their legs, and one of the slaves walked lame, the
soles of his feet being very much blistered and inflamed; we proceeded,
notwithstanding, and about eleven o’clock began to ascend a rocky
hill called Boki-Kooro, and it was past two in the afternoon before we
reached the level ground on the other side. This was the most rocky
road we had yet encountered, and it hurt our feet much. In a short
time we arrived at a pretty large river called Boki, which we forded:
it ran smooth and clear, over a bed of whinstone. About a mile to the
westward of the river, we came to a road which leads to the north-east
towards Gadou, and seeing the marks of many horses’ feet upon the
soft sand, the Slatees conjectured that a party of plunderers had
lately rode that way, to fall upon some town of Gadou; and lest they
should discover, upon their return, that we had passed, and attempt to
pursue us by the marks of our feet, the coffle was ordered to disperse,
and travel in a loose manner through the high grass and bushes. A
little before it was dark, having crossed the ridge of hills to the
westward of the river Boki, we came to a well called _cullong qui_
(white sand well), and here we rested for the night.

April 27th. We departed from the well early in the morning, and walked
on, with the greatest alacrity, in hopes of reaching a town before
night. The road, during the forenoon, led through extensive thickets of
dry bamboos. About two o’clock we came to a stream called Nunkolo,
where we were each of us regaled with a handful of meal, which,
according to a superstitious custom, was not to be eaten until it was
first moistened with water from this stream. About four o’clock we
reached Sooseeta, a small Jallonka village, situated in the district
of Kullo, which comprehends all that tract of country lying along the
banks of the Black river, or main branch of the Senegal. These were the
first human habitations we had seen, since we left the village to the
westward of Kenytakooro; having travelled in the course of the last
five days, upwards of one hundred miles. Here, after a great deal of
entreaty, we were provided with huts to sleep in; but the master of the
village plainly told us that he could not give us any provisions, as
there had lately been a great scarcity in this part of the country. He
assured us, that before they had gathered in their present crops,
the whole inhabitants of Kullo had been for twenty-nine days without
tasting corn; during which time, they supported themselves entirely
upon the yellow powder which is found in the pods of the _nitta_,
so called by the natives, a species of mimosa; and upon the seeds
of the bamboo cane, which, when properly pounded and dressed, taste
very much like rice. As our dry provisions were not yet exhausted,
a considerable quantity of kouskous was dressed for supper, and many
of the villagers were invited to take part of the repast; but they
made a very bad return for this kindness; for in the night they seized
upon one of the schoolmaster’s boys, who had fallen asleep under
the Bentang tree, and carried him away. The boy fortunately awoke
before he was far from the village, and setting up a loud scream,
the man who carried him, put his hand upon his mouth, and run with
him into the woods; but afterward understanding that he belonged
to the schoolmaster, whose place of residence is only three day’s
journey distant, he thought, I suppose, that he could not retain him
as a slave, without the schoolmaster’s knowledge; and therefore
stripped off the boy’s clothes, and permitted him to return.

April 28th. Early in the morning we departed from Sooseeta, and about
ten o’clock, came to an unwalled town called Manna; the inhabitants
of which were employed in collecting the fruit of the nitta trees,
which are very numerous in this neighbourhood. The pods are long and
narrow, and contain a few black seeds enveloped in the fine mealy
powder before mentioned; the meal itself is of a bright yellow colour,
resembling the flour of sulphur, and has a sweet mucilaginous taste:
when eaten by itself it is clammy, but when mixed with milk or water,
it constitutes a very pleasant and nourishing article of diet.

The language of the people of Manna, is the same that is spoken all
over that extensive and hilly country called Jallonkadoo. Some of the
words have a great affinity to the Mandingo, but the natives themselves
consider it as a distinct language: their numerals are these,

  One    ---  _Kidding_.

  Two    ---  _Fidding_.

  Three  ---  _Sarra_.

  Four   ---  _Nani_.

  Five   ---  _Soolo_.

  Six    ---  _Seni_.

  Seven  ---  _Soolo ma fidding_.

  Eight  ---  _Soolo ma sarra_.

  Nine   ---  _Soolo ma nani_.

  Ten    ---  _Nuff_.

The Jallonkas, like the Mandingoes, are governed by a number of petty
chiefs, who are, in a great measure, independent of each other: they
have no common sovereign, and the chiefs are seldom upon such terms
of friendship as to assist each other, even in war time. The chief
of Manna, with a number of his people, accompanied us to the banks of
the Bafing, or Black river (a principal branch of the Senegal) which
we crossed upon a bridge of bamboos, of a very singular construction;
some idea of which may be formed from the annexed engraving. The river
at this place is smooth and deep, and has very little current. Two
tall trees, when tied together by the tops, are sufficiently long to
reach from one side to the other; the roots resting upon the rocks,
and the tops floating in the water. When a few trees have been placed
in this direction, they are covered with dry bamboos, so as to form
a floating bridge, with a sloping gangway at each end, where the
trees rest upon the rocks. This bridge is carried away every year
by the swelling of the river in the rainy season, and is constantly
rebuilt by the inhabitants of Manna, who, on that account, expect a
small tribute from every passenger.

[Illustration: _J. C. Barrow del. from a sketch by M. Park._

_Engraved by W. C. Wilson._

A View of a Bridge over the Ba-fing or Black River.

Publish’d Jany. 1.1799. by G. Nicol, Pall Mall.]

In the afternoon we passed several villages, at none of which could
we procure a lodging; and in the twilight we received information
that two hundred Jallonkas had assembled near a town called Melo,
with a view to plunder the coffle. This induced us to alter our
course, and we travelled with great secresy until midnight, when
we approached a town called Koba. Before we entered the town, the
names of all the people belonging to the coffle were called over,
and a freeman and three slaves were found to be missing. Every person
immediately concluded that the slaves had murdered the freeman, and
made their escape. It was therefore agreed that six people should
go back as far as the last village, and endeavour to find his body,
or collect some information concerning the slaves. In the meantime
the coffle was ordered to lie concealed in a cotton field near a
large nitta tree, and nobody to speak, except in a whisper. It was
towards morning before the six men returned, having heard nothing
of the man or the slaves. As none of us had tasted victuals for the
last twenty-four hours, it was agreed that we should go into Koba,
and endeavour to procure some provisions. We accordingly entered the
town before it was quite day, and Karfa purchased from the chief man,
for three strings of beads, a considerable quantity of ground nuts,
which we roasted and eat for breakfast: we were afterwards provided
with huts, and rested here for the day.

About eleven o’clock, to our great joy and surprise, the freeman and
slaves, who had parted from the coffle the preceding night, entered the
town. One of the slaves, it seems, had hurt his foot, and the night
being very dark, they soon lost sight of the coffle. The freeman, as
soon as he found himself alone with the slaves, was aware of his own
danger, and insisted on putting them in irons. The slaves were at first
rather unwilling to submit, but when he threatened to stab them one by
one with his spear, they made no further resistance; and he remained
with them among the bushes until morning, when he let them out of
irons, and came to the town in hopes of hearing which route the coffle
had taken. The information that we received concerning the Jallonkas,
who intended to rob the coffle, was this day confirmed, and we were
forced to remain here until the afternoon of the 30th; when Karfa
hired a number of people to protect us, and we proceeded to a village
called Tinkingtang. Departing from this village on the day following,
we crossed a high ridge of mountains to the west of the Black river,
and travelled over a rough stony country until sunset, when we arrived
at Lingicotta, a small village in the district of Woradoo. Here we
shook out the last handful of meal from our dry provision bags; this
being the second day (since we crossed the Black river) that we had
travelled from morning until night, without tasting one morsel of food.

May 2d. We departed from Lingicotta; but the slaves being very much
fatigued, we halted for the night at a village about nine miles
to the westward, and procured some provisions through the interest
of the schoolmaster; who now sent forward a messenger to Malacotta,
his native town, to inform his friends of his arrival in the country,
and to desire them to provide the necessary quantity of victuals to
entertain the coffle for two or three days.

May 3d. We set out for Malacotta, and about noon arrived at a village,
near a considerable stream of water which flows to the westward; here
we determined to stop for the return of the messenger which had been
sent to Malacotta the day before; and as the natives assured me there
were no crocodiles in this stream, I went and bathed myself. Very few
people here can swim; for they came in numbers to dissuade me from
venturing into a pool, where they said the water would come over my
head. About two o’clock the messenger returned from Malacotta; and
the schoolmaster’s elder brother being impatient to see him, came
along with the messenger to meet him at this village. The interview
between the two brothers, who had not seen each other for nine years,
was very natural and affecting. They fell upon each other’s neck,
and it was sometime before either of them could speak. At length,
when the schoolmaster had a little recovered himself, he took his
brother by the hand, and turning round, “This is the man” (said
he, pointing to Karfa) “who has been my father in Manding; I would
have pointed him out sooner to you, but my heart was too full.”

We reached Malacotta in the evening, where we were well received. This
is an unwalled town; the huts for the most part are made of split
cane, twisted into a sort of wicker-work, and plastered over with
mud. Here we remained three days, and were each day presented with a
bullock from the schoolmaster; we were likewise well entertained by
the townspeople, who appear to be very active and industrious. They
make very good soap, by boiling ground nuts in water, and then adding
a ley of wood ashes. They likewise manufacture excellent iron, which
they carry to Bondou to barter for salt. A party of the townspeople
had lately returned from a trading expedition of this kind, and
brought information concerning a war between Almami Abdulkader,
King of Foota Torra, and Damel, King of the Jaloffs. The events
of this war soon became a favourite subject with the singing men,
and the common topic of conversation in all the kingdoms bordering
upon the Senegal and Gambia; and as the account is somewhat singular,
I shall here abridge it, for the reader’s information. The King of
Foota Torra, inflamed with a zeal for propagating his religion, had
sent an embassy to Damel, similar to that which he had sent to Kasson,
as related in page 79. The ambassador, on the present occasion, was
accompanied by two of the principal Bushreens, who carried each a large
knife, fixed on the top of a long pole. As soon as he had procured
admission into the presence of Damel, and announced the pleasure of
his sovereign, he ordered the Bushreens to present the emblems of his
mission. The two knives were accordingly laid before Damel, and the
ambassador explained himself as follows: “With this knife, (said he)
Abdulkader will condescend to shave the head of Damel, if Damel will
embrace the Mahomedan faith; and with this other knife, Abdulkader
will cut the throat of Damel, if Damel refuses to embrace it:—take
your choice.” Damel coolly told the ambassador that he had no choice
to make: he neither chose to have his head shaved, nor his throat cut;
and with this answer the ambassador was civilly dismissed. Abdulkader
took his measures accordingly, and with a powerful army invaded
Damel’s country. The inhabitants of the towns and villages filled up
their wells, destroyed their provisions, carried off their effects,
and abandoned their dwellings, as he approached. By this means he
was led on from place to place, until he had advanced three day’s
journey into the country of the Jaloffs. He had, indeed, met with no
opposition; but his army had suffered so much from the scarcity of
water, that several of his men had died by the way. This induced him
to direct his march towards a watering place in the woods, where his
men, having quenched their thirst, and being overcome with fatigue,
lay down carelessly to sleep among the bushes. In this situation they
were attacked by Damel before daybreak, and compleatly routed. Many of
them were trampled to death as they lay asleep, by the Jaloff horses;
others were killed in attempting to make their escape; and a still
greater number were taken prisoners. Among the latter, was Abdulkader
himself. This ambitious, or rather frantic prince, who, but a month
before, had sent the threatening message to Damel, was now himself
led into his presence as a miserable captive. The behaviour of Damel,
on this occasion, is never mentioned by the singing men, but in terms
of the highest approbation; and it was, indeed, so extraordinary, in an
African prince, that the reader may find it difficult to give credit to
the recital. When his royal prisoner was brought before him in irons,
and thrown upon the ground, the magnanimous Damel, instead of setting
his foot upon his neck, and stabbing him with his spear, according
to custom in such cases, addressed him as follows. “Abdulkader,
answer me this question. If the chance of war had placed me in your
situation, and you in mine, how would you have treated me?” “I
would have thrust my spear into your heart;” returned Abdulkader
with great firmness, “and I know that a similar fate awaits me.”
“Not so, (said Damel) my spear is indeed red with the blood of your
subjects killed in battle, and I could now give it a deeper stain,
by dipping it in your own; but this would not build up my towns,
nor bring to life the thousands who fell in the woods. I will not
therefore kill you in cold blood, but I will retain you as my slave,
until I perceive that your presence in your own kingdom will be no
longer dangerous to your neighbours; and then I will consider of the
proper way of disposing of you.” Abdulkader was accordingly retained,
and worked as a slave, for three months; at the end of which period,
Damel listened to the solicitations of the inhabitants of Foota Torra,
and restored to them their king. Strange as this story may appear,
I have no doubt of the truth of it; it was told me at Malacotta by
the Negroes; it was afterwards related to me by the Europeans on the
Gambia; by some of the French at Goree; and confirmed by nine slaves,
who were taken prisoners along with Abdulkader, by the watering place
in the woods, and carried in the same ship with me to the West Indies.




                             CHAPTER XXVI.                              

_The Caravan proceeds to Konkodoo, and crosses the Falemé River. —
Its Arrival at Baniserile, Kirwani, and Tambacunda. — Incidents on
the Road. — A matrimonial Case. — Specimen of the Shea Tree. —
The Caravan proceeds through many Towns and Villages, and arrives
at length on the Banks of the Gambia, — passes through Medina,
the Capital of Woolli, and finally stops at Jindey. — The Author,
accompanied by Karfa, proceeds to Pisania. — Various Occurrences
previous to his Departure from Africa, — takes his Passage in an
American Ship. — Short Account of his Voyage to Great Britain by
the Way of the West Indies._


On the 7th of May, we departed from Malacotta, and having crossed the
_Ba lee_, “Honey river,” a branch of the Senegal, we arrived in
the evening at a walled town called Bintingala; where we rested two
days. From thence, in one day more, we proceeded to Dindikoo, a small
town situated at the bottom of a high ridge of hills, from which this
district is named _Konkodoo_, “the hilly country.” These hills are
very productive of gold. I was shewn a small quantity of this metal,
which had been lately collected: the grains were about the usual size,
but much flatter than those of Manding, and were found in white quartz,
which had been broken to pieces by hammers. At this town I met with
a Negro, whose hair and skin were of a dull white colour. He was of
that sort which are called in the Spanish West Indies _Albinos_, or
white Negroes. The skin is cadaverous and unsightly, and the natives
considered this complexion (I believe truly) as the effect of disease.

May 11th. At daybreak we departed from Dindikoo, and after a
toilsome day’s travel, arrived in the evening at Satadoo, the
capital of a district of the same name. This town was formerly of
considerable extent; but many families had left it in consequence of
the predatory incursions of the Foulahs of Foota Jalla, who made it
a practice to come secretly through the woods, and carry off people
from the corn-fields, and even from the wells near the town. In the
afternoon of the 12th, we crossed the Falemé river, the same which
I had formerly crossed at Bondou in my journey eastward. This river,
at this season of the year, is easily forded at this place, the stream
being only about two feet deep. The water is very pure, and flows
rapidly over a bed of sand and gravel. We lodged for the night at a
small village called Medina, the sole property of a Mandingo merchant,
who, by a long intercourse with Europeans, has been induced to adopt
some of their customs. His victuals were served up in pewter dishes,
and even his houses were built after the fashion of the English houses
on the Gambia.

May 13th. In the morning, as we were preparing to depart, a coffle
of slaves belonging to some Serawoolli traders, crossed the river,
and agreed to proceed with us to Baniserile, the capital of Dentila;
a very long day’s journey from this place. We accordingly set out
together, and travelled with great expedition, through the woods,
until noon; when one of the Serawoolli slaves dropt the load from his
head, for which he was smartly whipped. The load was replaced; but he
had not proceeded above a mile before he let it fall a second time,
for which he received the same punishment. After this he travelled
in great pain until about two o’clock, when we stopt to breathe a
little, by a pool of water, the day being remarkably hot. The poor
slave was now so completely exhausted that his master was obliged
to release him from the rope, for he lay motionless on the ground. A
Serawoolli therefore undertook to remain with him, and endeavour to
bring him to the town during the cool of the night: in the meanwhile
we continued our route, and after a very hard day’s travel, arrived
at Baniserile late in the evening.

One of our Slatees was a native of this place, from which he had been
absent three years. This man invited me to go with him to his house;
at the gate of which his friends met him, with many expressions of joy;
shaking hands with him, embracing him, and singing and dancing before
him. As soon as he had seated himself upon a mat, by the threshold
of his door, a young woman (his intended bride) brought a little
water in a calabash, and kneeling down before him, desired him to
wash his hands: when he had done this, the girl with a tear of joy
sparkling in her eyes, drank the water; this being considered as
the greatest proof she could possibly give him of her fidelity and
attachment. About eight o’clock the same evening, the Serawoolli,
who had been left in the woods to take care of the fatigued slave,
returned and told us that he was dead: the general opinion, however,
was that he himself had killed him, or left him to perish on the road;
for the Serawoollies are said to be infinitely more cruel in their
treatment of slaves than the Mandingoes. We remained at Baniserile
two days, in order to purchase native iron, Shea-butter, and some
other articles for sale on the Gambia; and here the Slatee who had
invited me to his house, and who possessed three slaves, part of the
coffle, having obtained information that the price on the Coast was
very low, determined to separate from us, and remain, with his slaves,
where he was, until an opportunity should offer of disposing of them
to advantage; giving us to understand that he should complete his
nuptials, with the young woman before mentioned, in the meantime.

May 16th. We departed from Baniserile, and travelled through thick
woods until noon, when we saw at a distance, the town of Julifunda,
but did not approach it; as we proposed to rest for the night at a
large town called Kirwani, which we reached about four o’clock in
the afternoon. This town stands in a valley, and the country, for more
than a mile round it, is cleared of wood, and well cultivated. The
inhabitants appear to be very active and industrious, and seem to
have carried the system of agriculture to some degree of perfection;
for they collect the dung of their cattle into large heaps during
the dry season, for the purpose of manuring their land with it
at the proper time. I saw nothing like this in any other part of
Africa. Near the town are several smelting furnaces, from which the
natives obtain very good iron. They afterwards hammer the metal into
small bars, about a foot in length and two inches in breadth, one of
which bars is sufficient to make two Mandingo corn paddles. On the
morning after our arrival, we were visited by a Slatee of this place,
who informed Karfa that among some slaves he had lately purchased,
was a native of Foota Jalla; and as that country was at no great
distance, he could not safely employ him in the labours of the field,
lest he should effect his escape. The Slatee was therefore desirous
of exchanging this slave for one of Karfa’s, and offered some
cloth and Shea-butter, to induce Karfa to comply with the proposal,
which was accepted. The Slatee thereupon sent a boy to order the
slave in question to bring him a few ground nuts. The poor creature
soon afterwards entered the court in which we were sitting, having no
suspicion of what was negotiating, until the master caused the gate
to be shut, and told him to sit down. The slave now saw his danger,
and perceiving the gate to be shut upon him, threw down the nuts
and jumped over the fence. He was immediately pursued and overtaken
by the Slatees, who brought him back, and secured him in irons,
after which one of Karfa’s slaves was released and delivered in
exchange. The unfortunate captive was at first very much dejected,
but in the course of a few days his melancholy gradually subsided;
and he became at length as cheerful as any of his companions.

Departing from Kirwani on the morning of the 20th, we entered the
Tenda Wilderness of two days’ journey. The woods were very thick,
and the country shelved towards the south-west. About ten o’clock we
met a coffle of twenty-six people, and seven loaded asses returning
from the Gambia. Most of the men were armed with muskets, and had
broad belts of scarlet cloth over their shoulders, and European hats
upon their heads. They informed us that there was very little demand
for slaves on the Coast, as no vessel had arrived for some months
past. On hearing this, the Serawoollies, who had travelled with us
from the Falemé river, separated themselves and their slaves from
the coffle. They had not, they said, the means of maintaining their
slaves in Gambia, until a vessel should arrive; and were unwilling to
sell them to disadvantage: they therefore departed to the northward for
Kajaaga. We continued our route through the Wilderness, and travelled
all day through a rugged country, covered with extensive thickets of
bamboo. At sunset, to our great joy, we arrived at a pool of water
near a large Tabba tree, whence the place is called Tabba-gee,
and here we rested a few hours. The water at this season of the
year is by no means plentiful in these woods; and as the days were
insufferably hot, Karfa proposed to travel in the night. Accordingly,
about eleven o’clock, the slaves were taken out of their irons,
and the people of the coffle received orders to keep close together;
as well to prevent the slaves from attempting to escape, as on account
of the wild beasts. We travelled with great alacrity until daybreak,
when it was discovered that a free woman had parted from the coffle in
the night: her name was called until the woods resounded; but no answer
being given, we conjectured that she had either mistaken the road,
or that a lion had seized her unperceived. At length it was agreed
that four people should go back a few miles to a small rivulet, where
some of the coffle had stopt to drink, as we passed it in the night;
and that the coffle should wait for their return. The sun was about
an hour high before the people came back with the woman, whom they
found lying fast asleep by the stream. We now resumed our journey,
and about eleven o’clock reached a walled town called Tambacunda,
where we were well received. Here we remained four days, on account
of a _palaver_ which was held on the following occasion: Modi Lemina,
one of the Slatees belonging to the coffle, had formerly married a
woman of this town, who had borne him two children; he afterwards
went to Manding, and remained there eight years, without sending any
account of himself, during all that time, to his deserted wife; who,
seeing no prospect of his return, at the end of three years had married
another man, to whom she had likewise borne two children. Lemina now
claimed his wife; but the second husband refused to deliver her up;
insisting that by the laws of Africa, when a man has been three years
absent from his wife, without giving her notice of his being alive,
the woman is at liberty to marry again. After all the circumstances
had been fully investigated in an assembly of the chief men, it was
determined that the wife should make her choice, and be at liberty
either to return to the first husband, or continue with the second,
as she alone should think proper. Favourable as this determination
was to the lady, she found it a difficult matter to make up her mind,
and requested time for consideration: but I think I could perceive that
_first love_ would carry the day. Lemina was indeed somewhat older than
his rival, but he was also much richer. What weight this circumstance
had in the scale of his wife’s affections, I pretend not to say.

On the morning of the 26th, as we departed from Tambacunda, Karfa
observed to me, that there were no Shea trees farther to the westward
than this town. I had collected and brought with me from Manding the
leaves and flowers of this tree; but they were so greatly bruised on
the road that I thought it best to gather another specimen at this
place; and accordingly collected that from which the annexed engraving
is taken. The appearance of the fruit evidently places the Shea tree
in the natural order of _sapotæ_, and it has some resemblance to
the _madhuca_ tree, described by Lieutenant Charles Hamilton, in the
Asiatic Researches, Vol. I. p. 300. About one o’clock, we reached
Sibikillin, a walled village, but the inhabitants having the character
of inhospitality towards strangers, and of being much addicted to
theft, we did not think proper to enter the gate. We rested a short
time under a tree, and then continued our route until it was dark,
when we halted for the night by a small stream running towards the
Gambia. Next day the road led over a wild and rocky country, every
where rising into hills, and abounding with monkeys and wild beasts. In
the rivulets among the hills, we found great plenty of fish. This
was a very hard day’s journey, and it was not until sunset, that
we reached the village of Koomboo, near to which are the ruins of
a large town formerly destroyed by war. The inhabitants of Koomboo,
like those of Sibikillin, have so bad a reputation, that strangers
seldom lodge in the village; we accordingly rested for the night
in the fields, where we erected temporary huts for our protection,
there being great appearance of rain.

[Illustration: _Shea or the Butter Tree._

_Mackenzie sculp._

_Published as the Act directs, January 1.1799. by George Nicol,
Pall Mall._]

May 28th. We departed from Koomboo, and slept at a Foulah town about
seven miles to the westward; from which on the day following, having
crossed a considerable branch of the Gambia, called Neola Koba,
we reached a well inhabited part of the country. Here are several
towns within sight of each other, collectively called Tenda, but
each is distinguished also by its particular name. We lodged at one
of them called Koba Tenda, where we remained the day following, in
order to procure provisions for our support in crossing the Simbani
woods. On the 30th we reached Jallacotta; a considerable town,
but much infested by Foulah banditti, who come through the woods
from Bondou, and steal every thing they can lay their hands on. A
few days before our arrival, they had stolen twenty head of cattle,
and on the day following made a second attempt; but were beaten off,
and one of them taken prisoner. Here, one of the slaves belonging
to the coffle, who had travelled with great difficulty for the last
three days, was found unable to proceed any farther: his master (a
singing man) proposed therefore to exchange him for a young slave
girl, belonging to one of the townspeople. The poor girl was ignorant
of her fate, until the bundles were all tied up in the morning,
and the coffle ready to depart; when, coming with some other young
women to see the coffle set out, her master took her by the hand,
and delivered her to the singing man. Never was a face of serenity
more suddenly changed into one of the deepest distress: the terror
she manifested on having the load put upon her head, and the rope
fastened round her neck, and the sorrow with which she bade adieu
to her companions, were truly affecting. About nine o’clock, we
crossed a large plain covered with _ciboa_ trees (a species of palm),
and came to the river Nerico, a branch of the Gambia. This was but a
small river at this time, but in the rainy season it is often dangerous
to travellers. As soon as we had crossed this river, the singing men
began to vociferate a particular song, expressive of their joy at
having got safe into the west country, or, as they expressed it, _the
land of the setting sun_. The country was found to be very level, and
the soil a mixture of clay and sand. In the afternoon it rained hard,
and we had recourse to the common Negro umbrella, a large ciboa leaf,
which, being placed upon the head, completely defends the whole body
from the rain. We lodged for the night under the shade of a large
tabba tree, near the ruins of a village. On the morning following,
we crossed a stream called Noulico, and about two o’clock, to my
infinite joy, I saw myself once more on the banks of the Gambia,
which at this place being deep and smooth, is navigable; but the
people told me that a little lower down, the stream is so shallow
that the coffles frequently cross it on foot. On the south side of
the river opposite to this place, is a large plain of clayey ground,
called Toombi Toorila. It is a sort of morass, in which people are
frequently lost, it being more than a day’s journey across it. In the
afternoon we met a man and two women, with bundles of cotton cloth upon
their heads. They were going, they said, for Dentila, to purchase iron,
there being a great scarcity of that article on the Gambia. A little
before it was dark, we arrived at a village in the kingdom of Woolli,
called Seesukunda. Near this village there are great plenty of nitta
trees, and the slaves in passing along had collected large bunches of
the fruit; but such was the superstition of the inhabitants, that they
would not permit any of the fruit to be brought into the village. They
had been told, they said, that some catastrophe would happen to the
place, when people lived upon nittas, and neglected to cultivate corn.

June 2d. We departed from Seesukunda, and passed a number of villages,
at none of which was the coffle permitted to stop, although we
were all very much fatigued: it was four o’clock in the afternoon
before we reached Baraconda, where we rested one day. Departing from
Baraconda on the morning of the 4th, we reached in a few hours Medina,
the Capital of the King of Woolli’s dominions, from whom the reader
may recollect I received an hospitable reception in the beginning of
December, 1795, in my journey eastward.[25] I immediately inquired
concerning the health of my good old benefactor, and learnt with
great concern that he was dangerously ill. As Karfa would not allow
the coffle to stop, I could not present my respects to the king in
person; but I sent him word, by the officer to whom we paid customs,
that his prayers for my safety had not been unavailing. We continued
our route until sunset, when we lodged at a small village a little
to the westward of Kootakunda, and on the day following arrived at
Jindey; where, eighteen months before, I had parted from my friend
Dr. Laidley; an interval, during which I had not beheld the face of
a Christian nor once heard the delightful sound of my native language.

Being now arrived within a short distance of Pisania, from whence my
journey originally commenced, and learning that my friend Karfa was not
likely to meet with an immediate opportunity of selling his slaves on
the Gambia; it occurred to me to suggest to him, that he would find
it for his interest to leave them at Jindey, until a market should
offer. Karfa agreed with me in this opinion; and hired, from the chief
man of the town, huts for their accommodation, and a piece of land on
which to employ them, in raising corn, and other provisions for their
maintenance. With regard to himself, he declared that he would not
quit me until my departure from Africa. We set out accordingly, Karfa,
myself, and one of the Foulahs belonging to the coffle, early on the
morning of the 9th; but although I was now approaching the end of my
tedious and toilsome journey; and expected, in another day, to meet
with countrymen and friends, I could not part, for the last time, with
my unfortunate fellow-travellers, doomed, as I knew most of them to be,
to a life of captivity and slavery in a foreign land, without great
emotion. During a wearisome peregrination of more than five hundred
British miles, exposed to the burning rays of a tropical sun, these
poor slaves, amidst their own infinitely greater sufferings, would
commiserate mine; and frequently, of their own accord, bring water to
quench my thirst, and at night collect branches and leaves to prepare
me a bed in the Wilderness. We parted with reciprocal expressions of
regret and benediction. My good wishes and prayers were all I could
bestow upon them; and it afforded me some consolation to be told,
that they were sensible I had no more to give.

My anxiety to get forward admitting of no delay on the road, we reached
Tendacunda in the evening, and were hospitably received at the house of
an aged black female called Seniora Camilla, a person who had resided
many years at the English factory, and spoke our language. I was known
to her before I had left the Gambia, at the outset of my journey; but
my dress and figure were now so different from the usual appearance
of an European, that she was very excusable in mistaking me for a
Moor. When I told her my name and country, she surveyed me with great
astonishment, and seemed unwilling to give credit to the testimony of
her senses. She assured me that none of the traders on the Gambia, ever
expected to see me again; having been informed long ago, that the Moors
of Ludamar had murdered me, as they had murdered Major Houghton. I
inquired for my two attendants, Johnson and Demba, and learnt, with
great sorrow, that neither of them was returned. Karfa, who had
never before heard people converse in English, listened to us with
great attention. Every thing he saw seemed wonderful. The furniture
of the house, the chairs, &c. and particularly beds with curtains,
were objects of his great admiration; and he asked me a thousand
questions concerning the utility and necessity of different articles;
to some of which I found it difficult to give satisfactory answers.

On the morning of the 10th, Mr. Robert Ainsley, having learnt that I
was at Tendacunda, came to meet me, and politely offered me the use
of his horse. He informed me that Dr. Laidley had removed all his
property to a place called Kaye, a little farther down the river,
and that he was then gone to Doomasansa with his vessel, to purchase
rice; but would return in a day or two. He therefore invited me to
stay with him at Pisania, until the Doctor’s return. I accepted
the invitation, and being accompanied by my friend Karfa, reached
Pisania about ten o’clock. Mr. Ainsley’s schooner was lying at
anchor before the place. This was the most surprising object which
Karfa had yet seen. He could not easily comprehend the use of the
masts, sails, and rigging; nor did he conceive that it was possible,
by any sort of contrivance, to make so large a body move forwards by
the common force of the wind. The manner of fastening together the
different planks which composed the vessel, and filling up the seams
so as to exclude the water, was perfectly new to him; and I found that
the schooner with her cable and anchor, kept Karfa in deep meditation
the greater part of the day.

About noon on the 12th, Dr. Laidley returned from Doomasansa, and
received me with great joy and satisfaction, as one risen from the
dead. Finding that the wearing apparel which I had left under his care
was not sold or sent to England, I lost no time in resuming the English
dress; and disrobing my chin of its venerable incumbrance. Karfa
surveyed me in my British apparel with great delight; but regretted
exceedingly that I had taken off my beard; the loss of which,
he said, had converted me from a man into a boy. Doctor Laidley
readily undertook to discharge all the pecuniary engagements which
I had entered into since my departure from the Gambia, and took my
draft upon the Association for the amount. My agreement with Karfa
(as I have already related), was to pay him the value of one prime
slave; for which I had given him my bill upon Dr. Laidley, before
we departed from Kamalia: for, in case of my death on the road,
I was unwilling that my benefactor should be a loser. But this good
creature had continued to manifest towards me so much kindness, that
I thought I made him but an inadequate recompence, when I told him
that he was now to receive double the sum I had originally promised;
and Dr. Laidley assured him that he was ready to deliver the goods to
that amount, whenever he thought proper to send for them. Karfa was
overpowered by this unexpected token of my gratitude, and still more
so, when he heard that I intended to send a handsome present to the
good old schoolmaster, Fankooma, at Malacotta. He promised to carry
up the goods along with his own, and Dr. Laidley assured him, that he
would exert himself in assisting him to dispose of his slaves to the
best advantage, the moment a slave vessel should arrive. These, and
other instances of attention and kindness shewn him by Dr. Laidley,
were not lost upon Karfa. He would often say to me, “my journey
has indeed been prosperous!” But, observing the improved state
of our manufactures, and our manifest superiority in the arts of
civilized life, he would sometimes appear pensive, and exclaim with an
involuntary sigh, _fato fing inta feng_, “black men are nothing.”
At other times, he would ask me with great seriousness, what could
possibly have induced me, who was no trader, to think of exploring
so miserable a country as Africa? He meant by this to signify that,
after what I must have witnessed in my own country, nothing in Africa
could in his opinion deserve a moment’s attention. I have preserved
these little traits of character in this worthy Negro, not only from
regard to the man, but also because they appear to me to demonstrate
that he possessed a mind _above his condition_: and to such of my
readers as love to contemplate human nature in all its varieties,
and to trace its progress from rudeness to refinement, I hope the
account I have given of this poor African will not be unacceptable.

No European vessel had arrived at Gambia for many months previous to my
return from the interior; and as the rainy season was now setting in, I
persuaded Karfa to return to his people at Jindey. He parted with me on
the 14th with great tenderness; but as I had little hopes of being able
to quit Africa for the remainder of the year, I told him, as the fact
was, that I expected to see him again before my departure. In this,
however, I was luckily disappointed; and my narrative now hastens to
its conclusion; for on the 15th, the ship Charles-Town, an American
vessel, commanded by Mr. Charles Harris, entered the river. She came
for slaves, intending to touch at Goree to fill up; and to proceed from
thence to South Carolina. As the European merchants on the Gambia,
had at this time a great many slaves on hand, they agreed with the
Captain to purchase the whole of his cargo, consisting chiefly of rum
and tobacco, and deliver him slaves to the amount, in the course of
two days. This afforded me such an opportunity of returning (though
by a circuitous route) to my native country, as I thought was not
to be neglected. I therefore immediately engaged my passage in this
vessel for America; and having taken leave of Dr. Laidley, to whose
kindness I was so largely indebted, and my other friends on the river,
I embarked at Kaye on the 17th day of June.

Our passage down the river was tedious and fatiguing; and the weather
was so hot, moist, and unhealthy, that before our arrival at Goree,
four of the seamen, the surgeon, and three of the slaves had died of
fevers. At Goree we were detained for want of provisions, until the
beginning of October.

The number of slaves received on board this vessel, both on the Gambia,
and at Goree, was one hundred and thirty; of whom about twenty-five
had been, I suppose, of free condition in Africa; as most of those,
being Bushreens, could write a little Arabic. Nine of them had become
captives in the religious war between Abdulkader and Damel, mentioned
in the latter part of the preceding Chapter. Two of the others had
seen me as I passed through Bondou, and many of them had heard of
me in the interior countries. My conversation with them, in their
native language, gave them great comfort; and as the surgeon was
dead, I consented to act in a medical capacity in his room for the
remainder of the voyage. They had in truth need of every consolation
in my power to bestow; not that I observed any wanton acts of cruelty
practised either by the master, or the seamen, towards them; but the
mode of confining and securing Negroes in the American slave ships,
(owing chiefly to the weakness of their crews,) being abundantly more
rigid and severe than in British vessels employed in the same traffic,
made these poor creatures to suffer greatly, and a general sickness
prevailed amongst them. Besides the three who died on the Gambia,
and six or eight while we remained at Goree, eleven perished at sea,
and many of the survivors were reduced to a very weak and emaciated
condition.

In the midst of these distresses, the vessel, after having been
three weeks at sea, became so extremely leaky, as to require
constant exertion at the pumps. It was found necessary, therefore,
to take some of the ablest of the Negro men out of irons, and employ
them in this labour; in which they were often worked beyond their
strength. This produced a complication of miseries not easily to be
described. We were, however, relieved much sooner than I expected;
for the leak continuing to gain upon us, notwithstanding our utmost
exertions to clear the vessel, the seamen insisted on bearing away
for the West Indies, as affording the only chance of saving our
lives. Accordingly, after some objections on the part of the master,
we directed our course for Antigua, and fortunately made that island
in about thirty-five days after our departure from Goree. Yet even
at this juncture we narrowly escaped destruction; for on approaching
the north-west side of the island, we struck on the Diamond Rock,
and got into St. John’s harbour with great difficulty. The vessel
was afterwards condemned as unfit for sea, and the slaves, as I have
heard, were ordered to be sold for the benefit of the owners.

At this island I remained ten days; when the Chesterfield Packet,
homeward bound from the Leeward Islands, touching at St. John’s for
the Antigua mail, I took my passage in that vessel. We sailed on the
24th of November; and, after a short but tempestuous voyage, arrived
at Falmouth on the 22d of December: from whence I immediately set out
for London; having been absent from England two years and seven months.


                                THE END.                                


[Footnote 25: Vide p. 34.]




                              A VOCABULARY                              
                                 OF THE                                 
                           MANDINGO LANGUAGE.                           
                               * * * * *                                


  Above, _santo_.

  Absent, _inteegee_; (_literally_, “not here.”)

  Abuse, _v. anenni_.

  Add, _akeejee_.

  Afraid, _silantee_.

  Afternoon, _oora_.

  Air, _fonio_.

  Alike, _beakillin_.

  Alive, _a beegee_, (is here.)

  All, _bea_.

  Always, _toomotoma_.

  And, _ning_.

  Angry, _jusu bota_; (_literally_, “the heart comes out.”)

  Angel, _melika_.

  Arm, _boulla_; (the same for _hand_.)

  Arrived, _footăta_.

  Arrow, _binni_.

  Ascend, _silli_.

  Asleep, _sinouta_.

  Assist, _maquoi_.

  Axe, _terang_.

  Back, _ko_.

  Bad, _jou_.

  Bag, _bota_.

  Barter, _v. fallan_.

  Bastard, _janka ding_; (_literally_, “nobody’s child.”)

  Beads, _connoo_.

  Beard, _bora_.

  Beat, _v. agossi_.

  Bees, _leekissi_.

  Bed, _larong_.

  Beer, _dolo_; (the same for strong liquor of any kind.)

  Before, _neata_; (“within sight.”)

  Behind, _kofi_.

  Belly, _konno_.

  Big, _awarata_.

  Bind or tie, _aseeti_.

  Bird, _cono_.

  Bite, _v. keeng_.

  Black, _fing_.

  Blood, _jollie_.

  Blue, _fingma_; (blackish.)

  Boil, _v. fagee_.

  Bone, _cooloo_.

  Book, _kittāba_.

  Borrow, _la_.

  Bottom, _joo_.

  Bow, _kalla_.

  Boy, _kea ding_; (_literally_, “male child”.)

  Brave, _fattee_.

  Bread, _munko_.

  Break, _v. affāra_; (the same word signifies “to kill” or
  “to destroy.”)

  Breasts, _sonjoo_.

  Bring, _insambo_.

  Brother, _ba-ding-kea_; (_literally_ “mother’s male child.”)

  Burn, _v. agēni_.

  Buy (or sell), _saun_.

  Call, _v. akilli_.

  Carry, _asāmbo_.

  Cat, _neancon_.

  Catch, _v. amuta_.

  Chest or coffer, _koonio_.

  Child, _ding_; (if very young, _dingding_)

  Cloth, _fauno_.

  Cold, _ninno_.

  Come, _na_.

  Coming _abenāli_.

  Completely, _betiki_.

  Cook, _v. tabbee_.

  Corn, _neo_.

  Country, _doo_.

  Cow, _nessee moosa_.

  Crowd, _n. setima_.

  Cry, _v. akumbo_.

  Cunning, _n. a. kissee_.

  Cut, _v. tegi_.

  Danger, _torro_.

  Dark, _dibbie_.

  Daughter, _ding moosa_; (_literally “female child.”_)

  Day, _teelee_.

  Dead, _asāta_.

  Deep, _adoonta_.

  Desist, _attoo_.

  Dew, _combi_.

  Die, _v. sa_.

  Dirt, _no_.

  Disease, _jankra_.

  Dispute, _degama_.

  Dog, _woola_.

  Door, _da_; (this is a word of very extensive use, being applied
  to whatever opens and shuts.)

  Down, _ad. dooma_.

  Dream, _v. sibota_.

  Dream, _n. s. sibo_.

  Drink, _v. ameen_.

  Dry, (arid) _ajāta_.

  Ear, _toola_.

  Earth, (soil) _banko_.

  Earth, (globe) _banko kang_.

  East, _teelee bo_; (“sunrise.”)

  Eat, _adummo_.

  Elephant, _samma_.

  Empty, _fing tigee_; (“nothing here.”)

  Enough, _keyento_.

  Entertain, (a guest) _fanda_.

  Expert, _cumering_; (“active, clever, &c.”)

  Eye, _nea_.

  Face, (the same as for the eye.)

  Fall, _v. bui_.

  Far off, _jangfata_.

  Fast, _v. soong_.

  Fat, _keng_.

  Father, _fa_.

  Fear, _v. seelan_.

  Feather, _tee_; (it signifies also _hair_ and _wool_.)

  Female, _moosa_.

  Fever, _candea_.

  Few, _do_.

  Fight _v. akilli_.

  Fill, _afundi_.

  Finger, _boulla konding_.

  Fire, _deemba_.

  Fish, _yeo_.

  Flesh, _sooboo_.

  Food, _kinnee_.

  Fool, _fooring_.

  Foot, _sing_; (signifies also “the leg.”)

  Forget, _neānata_.

  Free, _horea_.

  Fresh, _kinde_ (signifies also, _healthy_).

  Friend, _barrio_.

  Fruit, _eree ding_; (“child of the tree.”)

  Full, _affāta_.

  Give, _insong_.

  Glad, _lāta_.

  Go, _v. ta_.

  God, _alla_.

  Gold, _sanoo_.

  Good, _bettie_.

  Great, _baa_.

  Grass, _bing_.

  Gray, _aqueta_.

  Guard, _v. tenkoong_.

  Half, _tella_.

  Handsome, _aniniāta_.

  Hang up, _deng_.

  Hate, _v. akoong_.

  He, _etti_.

  Head, _koon_.

  Hear, _moi_.

  Heart, _jusu_.

  Heaven, _santo_; (the Mahomedan Negroes commonly say, _il jinna_.)

  Heavy, _acooliata_.

  Hell, _johaniba_.

  Hen, _soosee moosa_.

  Herb, _jambo_.

  Here, _jang_.

  Hide, _n. goolo_.

  Hill, _konko_.

  Hog, _lea_.

  Hole, _dinka_.

  Honey, _lee_.

  Horn, _bini_.

  Horse, _soo_.

  Hot, _candiāta_.

  House, _boong_.

  Hungry, _konkola_.

  I, _inta_.

  Idle, _nare_.

  Increase, _aboonia_.

  Industrious, _sayāta_.

  Interpret, _konno sor_; (literally, _to pierce the belly_.)

  Iron, _nega_.

  Island, _jouio_.

  Jump, _v. soun_.

  Kill, _affāra_.

  King, _mansa_.

  Knife, _mooro_.

  Know, _alla_.

  Lamp, _fitina_.

  Laugh, _v. jilli_.

  Lend, _infoo_.

  Lie (down), _v. la jang_.

  Lie (falsity) _fonio_.

  Lift, _achicka_.

  Lightning, _sanfata_.

  Lion, _jatta_; (in the interior countries, _wara_.)

  Little, _miessa_.

  Long, _jang_.

  Look, _v. affille_.

  Lose, _afeele_.

  Lost, _affeeleeta_.

  Love, _v. konie_.

  Make, _v. dada_.

  Male, _kea_.

  Man (homo) _mo_.

  Man (vir) _fato_.

  Many, _sitimata_.

  Market, _loe_.

  Master, _marree_.

  Mat, _basso_.

  Meet, _v. beng_.

  Middle, _taima_.

  Milk, _nunno_.

  Milk, _v. beetee_.

  Mine, _pr. talem_.

  Money, _naphula_; (it signifies also _merchandize_, or any _effects
  of value_.)

  Month, _korro_; (the same word signifies _the moon_.)

  Morning, _somo_.

  Mother, _ba_.

  Mouth, _da_.

  Narrative, _dentigi_.

  Name, _atto_.

  Near (nigh), _mun jang_; (not far.)

  Neck, _kang_.

  Never, _abada_.

  Night, _sooton_.

  No, _inta_; (literally, _is not_.)

  Noon, _teelee kooniata_; (literally, the _sun over head_.)

  North, _saheel_.

  Nose, _noong_.

  Now, _seng_.

  Oil, _toulou_.

  Obtain, _sutto_.

  Old, _accottata_.

  Only, _kinsing_.

  Open, _v. yelli_.

  Out of, _banta_.

  Pain, _deeming_.

  Paper, _coitoo_.

  Pass, _v. tambi_.

  Past, _atambita_; (gone by.)

  Pay, _v. jo_.

  Pen, _kalla_.

  People, _molo_.

  Pierce, _sor_.

  Pity, _v. dimi_.

  Pleasure, _di_.

  Pleasant, _adiāta_.

  Plenty, _asiāta_.

  Poor, _doiāta_.

  Present (gift), _boonia_.

  Promise, _v. moindee_.

  Proud, _telingabalia_; (literally, _strait bodied_.)

  Pull, _asabba_.

  Push, _āneury_.

  Put down, _alondi_.

  Quarrel, _quiāta_.

  Quick, _catăba_.

  Quiet, _dea_.

  Quiver, _n. s. toong_.

  Rain, _sangee_; (literally, _water from above_.)

  Rat, _nīnee_.

  Read, _akarra_.

  Red, _woolima_.

  Release, _affering_; (untie.)

  Rest, _lo_.

  Restore, _serrat_.

  Return, _v. n. ascita_.

  Ripe, _mota_.

  Rise, _v. wooli_.

  River, _ba_; (the same as for _mother_.)

  Road, _seelo_.

  Rob, _boitāca_.

  Rock, _kooro_.

  Rope, _julie_.

  Rotten, _accorata_.

  Row, _v. ajah_.

  Run, _boorie_.

  Sad, _doi_.

  Safe, _torro inteege_; (literally, _no danger_.)

  Salt, _ko_.

  Sand, _kini kini_.

  Sandals, _samata_.

  Say, _affo_.

  Sea, _babagee_.

  Seat, _serong_.

  See, _eāgee_.

  Send, _kee_.

  Separate, _atulla_.

  Shake, _jiggi jiggi_.

  Shame, _māla_.

  Shew, _aita_.

  Ship, _caloon_.

  Short, _sutta_.

  Shut, _tou_.

  Sick, _mun kinde_.

  Side, _carra_.

  Silent, _dering_.

  Silver, _cody_.

  Sing, _jilli_; (the same _to dance_.)

  Sister, _ba ding moosa_; (mother’s female child.)

  Sit, _see_.

  Sky, _sang_.

  Slave, _jong_.

  Sleep, _v. sinoo_.

  Smell, _v. soomboola_.

  Smoke, _seisee_.

  Snake, _sau_.

  Something, _fenke_.

  Son, _ding kea_; (male child.)

  Soon, _sang sang_; (now now.)

  Sour, _accoomiata_.

  South, _boulla ba_; (literally, _the right hand_.)

  Speak, _akummo_.

  Spear, _tamba_.

  Spin, _v. a. worondi_.

  Spoon, _dosa_.

  Star, _lolo_.

  Steal, _soonia_.

  Stink, _v. n. kassa_.

  Stone, _birro_

  Stop, _munia_.

  Stranger, _leuntōng_.

  Strike, _abooti_.

  Sun, _teelee_.

  Swear, _kolli_.

  Sweet, _teemiāta_.

  Swell, _foonoo_.

  Swim, _noo_.

  Sword, _fong_.

  Tail, _finnio_.

  Thief, _soon_.

  Thin, _feata_; (slender.)

  Think, _meira_.

  Thirst, _mindo_.

  Thread, _bori_.

  Throw, _fy_.

  Thunder, _sangfata_. (In contradistinction to lightning, it is
  _Kallam Alla_ (Arab.) “the voice of God.”)

  Tie, _v. asseetee_.

  To-day, _bee_.

  To-morrow, _sinny_.

  Tongue, _ning_.

  Touch, _v. ma_.

  Town, _kunda_.

  Trade, _v. feeree_.

  Tree, _eree_.

  True, _tonia_.

  Trust, _v. la_.

  Turn, _aelima_.

  Understand, _moi_.

  Until, _hāning_.

  Walk, _tāma_.

  War, _killi_.

  Wash, _v. coo_.

  Water, _gee_.

  Weary, _umbatata_.

  Weep, _akussi_.

  Weigh, _simang_.

  Well, _n. a. awa_.

  Well, _n. s. cullong_.

  West, _teelee gee_.

  Wet, _sinunta_.

  What, _mun_.

  Where, _minto_.

  White, _qui_.

  Who, _jema_.

  Why, _munkang_.

  Wind, _n. funnio_.

  Wolf, _soolo_.

  Woman, _moosa_.

  Wilderness, _woolla_.

  Yes, _awa_.

  Yesterday, _koona_.

  You, _eeta_, when simply pronounced; when joined to any other word,
  it is _ee_.

  Young, _juna_.

                               * * * * *                                

     _The following_ QUESTIONS _and_ ANSWERS _may be useful in the      
                             West Indies._

  Do you understand Mandingo?         _ee Mandingo kummo moi?_        

  I understand it,                    _ya moi_.                       

  I do not understand you,            _ma moi_.                       

  Come hither,                        _nā nā re_.                     

  Is your Father or Mother living?    _ee fā, ou ee bā abeegee?_      

  —— alive,                           _abeegee_.                      

  —— dead,                            _asāta_.                        

  Have you any brothers or sisters?   _ee bā ding abeegee?_           

  Where are they?                     _biminto?_                      

  Are they in Africa?                 _abbe fato fing doo?_           

  Are they on board the ship?         _abbe Tobaubo Caloon o konno?_  

  Point them out                      _aitanna_.                      

  What is the matter with you?        _mun bela?_                     

  Are you in health?                  _ko ee kinde?_                  

  I am sick.                          _mun kinde_.                    

  Shew me your tongue.                _ee ning aitanna_.              

  Give me your hand.                  _ee boulla adima_.              

  Are you hungry?                     _konkolabinna?_                 

  I am hungry.                        _konkolabinna_.                 

  Are you thirsty?                    _mindolabinna?_                 

  I am thirsty.                       _the same word repeated_.       

  I am not hungry.                    _konko inteegee_.               

  I am not thirsty.                   _mindo inteegee_.               

  Does your head ach?                 _ee koon bideemina?_            

  It does ach.                        _bideemina_.                    

  It does not ach.                    _intadeeming_.                  

  Does your stomach pain you?         _ee konno bideemina?_           

  Do you sleep well?                  _ko ee sinoo betiki?_           

  Are you feverish?                   _acandeata?_                    

  Do not be afraid.                   _kanna seelan_.                 

  There is no danger.                 _torro inteegee_.               

  Drink this medicine.                _ning borri ameen_.             

  It will do you good.                _aee kissi_.                    




                               APPENDIX.                                

                               * * * * *                                
                       GEOGRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATIONS                       
                                   OF                                   
                          MR. PARK’S JOURNEY.                           
                                   BY                                   
                             MAJOR RENNELL.                             
                               * * * * *                                


[Illustration: A MAP, _shewing the_ Progress _of DISCOVERY_ &
_IMPROVEMENT, in the_ GEOGRAPHY _of NORTH_ AFRICA: _Compiled by_
J. Rennell. _1798_.

_J. Walker Sculp._

_Published according to Act of Parliament by James Rennell May
25th. 1798._]

                      GEOGRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATIONS.                       
                               * * * * *                                

                               CHAPTER I.                               

_Concerning the Ideas entertained by the Ancient Geographers, as
well as the Moderns, down to the Times of Delisle and D’Anville,
respecting the Course of the River Niger._


The late journey of Mr. PARK, into the interior of WESTERN AFRICA, has
brought to our knowledge more important facts respecting its Geography
(both _moral_ and _physical_), than have been collected by any former
traveller. By pointing out to us the positions of the sources of the
great rivers SENEGAL, GAMBIA, and NIGER,[26] we are instructed where
to look for the elevated parts of the country; and even for the _most
elevated_ point in the western quarter of Africa, by the place from
whence the Niger and Gambia turn in opposite directions to the east
and west. We are taught, moreover, the common boundary of the desert
and fruitful parts of the country, and of the MOORS and NEGROES;
which latter is the more interesting, as it may be termed a boundary
in _moral_ geography; from the opposite qualities of mind, as well
as of body, of the Moors and Negroes: for that physical geography
gives rise to habits, which often determine national character,
must be allowed by every person, who is a diligent observer of mankind.

It must be acknowledged, that the absolute extent of Mr. Park’s
progress in Africa, compared with the amazing size of that continent,
appears but small, although it be nearly 1100 British miles in a
direct line, reckoned from its western extremity, Cape Verd. But
considered in itself, it is no inconsiderable line of travel; being
more extensive than the usual southern tour of Europe.

But moreover, it affords a triumph to the learned, in that it confirms
some points of fact, both of geography and natural history, which have
appeared in ancient authors, but to which our own want of knowledge
has denied credit. I allude more particularly to the _course_ of
the _Niger_, and the history of the _Lotophagi_. That the Greeks
and Romans, who had formed great establishments in Africa, and the
latter in particular, who had penetrated to the Niger[27] should
have had better opportunities of knowing the interior part of the
country, than we, who live at a distance from it, and possess only
a few scattered factories near the sea coast, is not to be wondered
at: but the proof of such facts should teach us to be less hasty in
decrying the authority of ancient authors; since the fault may arise
from a want of comprehension on our parts, or from an assumption of
false principles on theirs.

Few geographical facts have been more questioned in modern times, than
the course of the great inland river of Africa, generally understood
by the name of NIGER; some describing it to run to the _west_,
others to the _east_; but of these opinions, I believe the former
has been espoused by the most numerous party, by far.[28] Although
Mr. Park’s authority, founded on ocular demonstration, sets this
question _for ever_ at rest, by determining the course of the river
to be from _west_ to _east_, as Major Houghton’s information had
previously induced a belief of, yet it may not be amiss to trace the
history of the opinions, concerning the course of this celebrated
river, from the earliest date of profane history.

HERODOTUS,[29] more than twenty-two centuries ago, describes,
from the information of the Africans, a great river of Africa,
far removed to the south of the Great Desert, and abounding with
crocodiles. That it flowed from _west_ to _east_, dividing _Africa_,
in like manner as the Danube does _Europe_. That the people from the
borders of the Mediterranean, who made the discovery, were carried
to a great city on the banks of the river in question; and that the
people of this quarter were _black_; that is, much blacker than their
visitors. Our author, indeed, took this river to be the remote branch
of the Egyptian Nile, and reasons on the circumstance, accordingly:
but even this argument serves to express in a more forcible manner,
the supposed direction of its course.

PLINY also believed that the _Nile_ came from the west; but he is
far from identifying it with the _Niger_, which he describes as a
distinct river. But we have at least his negative opinion respecting
its western course; for he speaks of the _Bambotus_ river as running
into the Western ocean; meaning to express by it either the Gambia
or Senegal river, and not the Niger.[30]

PTOLEMY is positive in describing the Niger as a separate stream
from the Senegal and Gambia, which two rivers are designed by him
under the names of _Daradus_ and _Stachir_; and they are by no
means ill expressed; falling into the sea on different sides of the
_Arsinarium_ promontory, or Cape Verd.[31] The Niger of Ptolemy is
made to extend from west to east, over half the breadth of Africa,
between the Atlantic ocean, and the course of the Nile.

These may suffice for the ancient authorities, which in very early
times fixed the course of the Niger in the systems of geography, to be
_from west to east_. Who it was that first led the way, in the opposite
opinion, I know not; but we find EDRISI, in the twelfth century,
not only conducting the _Nile of the Negroes_, or Niger, _westward_,
and into the _Atlantic_, but also _deriving_ it from the _Egyptian_
Nile; which is diametrically opposite to the opinion of Herodotus.

Such an opinion marks the very imperfect state of his knowledge of
African geography; and should induce a degree of caution in receiving
other opinions of the same author, where they rest absolutely on his
own authority. It is very probable that the waters which collect on
the _west_ of _Nubia_, may _run to the west_, and be lost in lakes:
and it is possible, though very improbable, that a branch of the
Nile may take the same course: but fortified by the present state of
our knowledge, we may certainly pronounce the general scope of the
intelligence communicated by Edrisi, respecting the course of the
Niger, to be erroneous.

I conceive, however, that his error may easily be accounted for, in
this way. He was probably told, that the waters on the west of Nubia,
&c. ran to the westward. He also knew that a great river (the Senegal)
discharged itself into the Atlantic, nearly in the same parallel; and
moreover, that a great river, whose _line of direction_ lay between
the _east_ and _west_, and between Nubia and the just mentioned
_embouchure_, watered a very extensive tract, in the midland part
of Africa. Now, what so natural (admitting the fact of the western
waters from Nubia, and which I trust, I shall go near to prove in
the sequel) as to suppose, when he had found a _head_, and a _tail_
of a great river, together with a long extent of course of a river
between them, that they were parts of each other? It must also be
taken into the account, that he supposed the continent of Africa to
be about 1000 miles narrower than it really is, in the line between
Nubia and the mouth of the Senegal.

ABULFEDA followed Edrisi in the same opinion, respecting the Niger;
which he calls a _twin_ river with that of Egypt. He also calls
it the _Nile of Gana_. Abulfeda also knew, and has described, the
general form of the continent of Africa: and, of course knew that it
was surrounded by the sea.[32] But his descriptions are limited to
the north and north-east parts. He wrote in the fourteenth century.

It was Edrisi, probably, who influenced and determined the opinions
of the moderns, respecting this question. An author, long supposed
to be of the same region with that which he describes,[33] and
who had entered more into the _detail_ of the African geography,
than any other, would, according to the usual mode of decision, on
such pretensions, be preferred to those who went before him, and had
treated the subject in a more general way. Mankind had no criterion
by which to judge of the truth.

Since then the Arabian geographer, who had written the most extensively
on the subject, had conducted the Niger into the Atlantic, we cannot
wonder that the early Portuguese discoverers, who doubtless learnt
from the Arabian authors the particulars of African geography, should
adopt the same idea; and that they should regard the _Senegal_ river
as the _Niger_; as we find it, in the histories of their discoveries
in the fifteenth century. The Portuguese, who at this period took the
lead, in matters of navigation and discovery, might well be expected
to set the fashion, in what related to African geography. So that in
despite of Ptolemy, and of the ancients in general, the great inland
river of Africa was described to run _to_ the _west_; and to form
the head of the Senegal river. Nay more, it was at last supposed to
be the _parent stock_ of all the great _western_ rivers of Africa.

Sanuto, whose Geography of Africa, is dated 1588, describes one branch
of the Niger to be the _Rio Grande_, the other the river of _Sestos_;
regarding the Senegal as a different river.

M. DELISLE’s map of Africa (1707) gives the Niger a direct course
through Africa, from _Bornou_, in the east, and terminating in the
river of Senegal on the west. But in his maps of 1722 and 1727, this
was corrected: the source of the Senegal was placed at a shallow lake
named _Maberia_, between the 14th and 15th degrees of longitude east
of Cape Verd; and in latitude 12°; whilst the river of TOMBUCTOO,
named _Guien_, was described to issue from another lake, in the same
neighbourhood, and to flow _towards_ Bornou, where it terminated in
a third lake.

The cause of this change, may be easily traced, in the intelligence
collected by the French traders and settlers in GALLAM:[34] the
substance of which is to be found in Labat’s collection, published
in 1728; although the detail differs in some points. He says,
Vol. ii. p. 161, _et seq._ that the MANDINGA merchants report that
the Niger (by which he always means the Senegal river) springs from
the lake Maberia, whose situation could not be ascertained. That the
Gambia river was a branch of the Niger; separating from it at Baracota
(a position also unknown) and that it passed through a marshy lake,
in its way to _Baraconda_; where the English and Portuguese had
settlements. That the Niger, at a point below Baracota, sent forth
another branch, namely the _Falemé_ river; which encompassed the
country of _Bambouk_, and afterwards joined the _Niger_ in the country
of _Gallam_. And finally, that the same Niger, by its separation into
two branches, formed a very considerable island above Kasson. It may
be remarked, that a belief of these circumstances, manifests a gross
state of ignorance respecting the interior of the country; since
such derivations from rivers, are found only in _alluvial_ tracts:
and it happens, that scarcely any levels vary more than those, through
which the rivers in question pass; as will appear in the sequel.

They likewise report (p. 163) that on the east of the lake Maberia
lies the kingdom of _Guinbala_; within which, is the river of _Guien_,
which passes near the city of Tombuctoo. Again (Vol. iii. p. 361 to
364) it is said that Tombuctoo is not situated on the bank of the
Niger, but at about 6 leagues inland from it: and that in passing
to it, from Gallam (which is reported to be a journey of thirty-two
days only), they go through Timbi, five journies short of Tombuctoo;
where they leave the bank of the river, to avoid too great a _detour_.

Labat does not state in positive terms that the Niger or river of
Senegal affords a continuous navigation, from the falls of Govinea
(above Gallam) to Tombuctoo: but that he believed it, is strongly
implied, by what appears afterwards, in p. 367, 368; that is, a
project of a trade to Tombuctoo; “by keeping an establishment of
vessels above the falls; which vessels might ascend the Niger to a
point opposite to Tombuctoo, thereby saving the great expence and
fatigue of a land journey.”

Here then, we trace the idea of the lake of Maberia, the supposed head
of the Niger; and the river of Tombuctoo, under the name of Guien;
and moreover, (although these are not expressly said to communicate)
a continued navigation from Gallam to Tombuctoo. But it must surely
have struck those on the spot, to inquire whether any boats ever
descended from Tombuctoo to the falls of Govinea?

It is certain that Delisle, (as well as D’Anville, whose general
ideas are much the same, in this particular[35]) regards the river
Guien, as having no communication with the lake Maberia, but makes it
flow from a different lake, at no great distance to the northward: so
that these geographers so far understood the matter right; and denied
the practicability of a continuous navigation to Tombuctoo: but then,
they erred very greatly in placing the head of the Senegal, either so
remotely, or in the eastern quarter; since it rises in the south-east.

We must regard the geography of M. D’Anville, as the most perfect
of all, previous to the inquiries made by the AFRICAN ASSOCIATION. The
researches made under the direction of this Association, have already
established on record, from the reports of Major Houghton, and of
Mr. Magra, although in a vague way, the general position of the
sources of the Joliba, or Niger, in or near the country of Manding;
as well as its easterly or north-easterly course, towards Tombuctoo;
the position of Bammakoo, situated near the highest navigable point of
its course; of Sego, and Jenné, along its banks; the separation of its
waters, into two channels, in the quarter of Tombuctoo; together with
a vague idea of the position of that city itself. It will be shewn,
in the sequel, that Mr. Park’s observations do not contradict, but
establish these positions; drawing them out of the obscurity in which,
by the very nature of the information, they were necessarily involved;
and fixing, in some degree of just relative position and proportion,
those particulars which before remained at large, considered in a
geographical sense.

Concerning the errors of former geographers, they are more easily
detected than the _causes_ of them. They must, however, be ascribed,
partly to the ignorance of the African merchants; but, in all
probability, in a much greater part, to the want of understanding each
other’s language; a defect that has led to many errors, that are
oftentimes charged to the account of wilful falsehood, or, at least,
to an indifference to the cause of truth.

I can easily conceive that the caravan merchants, in passing
from Tombuctoo to Gallam (or the contrary), might have _deceived
themselves_ into a belief, that the principal rivers which they had
either crossed or skirted in their way, might communicate with each
other: for it appears clearly, by Mr. Park’s observations, that the
eastern branch of the Senegal, and the western branch of the Joliba,
approach very near to each other, in the early part of their courses;
so that, during the whole journey, the merchants might never be farther
distant from _a river_ to the southward of them, than a few journies.

As to the story, so long credited, of the Niger being the parent river,
from whence all the western rivers were derived, we may remark,
that ignorance, in every country through which large rivers take
their course, is very ready to derive them _all_ from _one source_;
and that source very probably, a _lake_. Within our own times, the
_Burrampooter_ and _Ava_ rivers were thus described in the maps. Pliny
reports, that the Euphrates and Tigris are united in Armenia, by the
medium of a lake:[36] and Edrisi, as we have seen, derived the Nile
and Niger, from one and the same lake.[37]

It will appear that the lake Maberia, taken by D’Anville and Delisle
for the head of the Senegal river, or that which runs to the _west_,
is meant for no other than the lake of _Dibbie_, formed by the river
Joliba, or that which runs to the _east_, and which Mr. Park’s
inquiries have brought to our knowledge. Again, we recognize the
river Guien, or Guin, of Labat, of D’Anville, and of Delisle, in the
northern branch of the same Joliba, issuing out of the lake Dibbie;
and which, together with the southern branch from the same lake, forms
an island, reported to be 90 or 100 miles in length, named Jinbala
by Mr. Park. There is a town on the side of the northern branch, also
named Jinbala; but whether the island may take its name from this town,
or from the river, whose _proper name_, from about this point, seems
to be _Guin_, or _Jin_, I know not. M. D’Anville has described,
in this position, the country of Guinbala, subject to Tonka Quata:
the same who is said by Labat to be sovereign of the country which
contains the lake of Maberia, and the river of Guien.[38]

Here, then, we have an explication of the error of those, who, from
the supposed information of the Mandinga merchants, supposed the lake
Maberia (answering to the Dibbie of Park), to form the source of
the Senegal river; and who took the river of Guin, or Jinbala, for
a distinct river, instead of a branch, issuing from that lake. The
Mandingas might very truly have informed the French settlers, that
the lake Maberia, and the rivers Joliba and Guin would convey them
to Tombuctoo; but did they say also, that the river of Senegal would
convey them to the lake Maberia? The French merchants, perhaps, taking
for granted that the navigation was continuous, might never inquire
whether their informants were speaking of _one_ or of _two_ rivers:
and the others might at the same time be speaking of _two_ distinct
rivers, and be ignorant of the prepossessions of their inquirers!

It may be added, that, whether from the difficulties that grew out of
the subject, when the geographical documents came to be analyzed, or
whether it was from actual information, both Delisle and D’Anville
describe _two_ lakes, near each other; one at the supposed head
of the Senegal river, the other at that of the Tombuctoo river. I
think it most probable, that it was occasioned by the want of their
being made to comprehend, that the waters ran _eastward to_, and not
_westward from_ the lake Maberia; so that when they were told that
the Tombuctoo river issued from a lake, they concluded it must be a
different one from that at the head of the Senegal. Certain it is,
however, that these geographers believed, that the waters ran to the
_west_, from this lake.

I have now brought to a conclusion, what was meant to be said on the
subject of the descriptions, and mistakes, of former geographers; in
the course of which it may be observed, that a period of twenty-two
centuries has brought matters round again to the same point. And
having thus cleared the ground, I next proceed to the more important
part of the subject, the proper discoveries of Mr. Park.


[Footnote 26: I here use the word NIGER, as being the best understood
by Europeans; but the proper name of this river in the country seems
to be _Guin_ or _Jin_. (Hartmann’s Edrisi, p. 32. 48. 51.) At the
same time, it is more commonly designed by the term JOLIBA, meaning
the _Great Water_, or great river. In like manner, the GANGES has
two names, _Padda_, the proper name; _Gonga_, the great river.

The Moors and Arabs call it NEEL ABEED, the _River of Slaves_;
but they have also a name to express the great water, that is, NEEL
KIBBEER. _Neel_ appears to be employed in Africa, as _Gonga_ in India,
to express any great river.

By _Niger_, the ancients meant merely to express the River of the
Black People, or _Ethiopians_. The term was Roman: for the Greeks
believed it to be the head, or a branch, of the _Egyptian Nile_.]

[Footnote 27: Pliny, lib. v. c. 4.]

[Footnote 28: M. J. Lalande, almost at the moment of Mr. Park’s
investigation, has determined its course to be to the west;
notwithstanding the forcible reasoning of his countryman
D’Anville. (Mémoire sur l’Intérieur de l’Afrique.) Mr. Bruce
was of the same opinion. Vol. iii. p. 720. 724.]

[Footnote 29: Euterpe, c. 32.]

[Footnote 30: Lib. v. c. 9.]

[Footnote 31: Probably a corruption of _Senhagi_; or _Assenhagi_, as
the early Portuguese discoverers write it. These were a great tribe.]

[Footnote 32: This was previous to the Portuguese discoveries.]

[Footnote 33: He was commonly called the _Nubian_ Geographer.]

[Footnote 34: Gallam is one of the names of the country in which Fort
St. Joseph is situated; and is often applied to the settlement itself.]

[Footnote 35: D’Anville differs from Delisle in extending very
greatly, the distance between Gallam and Tombuctoo; and by representing
the Maberia lake, as one source alone, and that the least distant,
of those of the river Senegal.]

[Footnote 36: Pliny, lib. vi. c. 27.]

[Footnote 37: Thomson believed it. After speaking of the Nile,
he says,—


  His _brother Niger_ too, and all the floods

  In which the full-form’d maids of Afric lave

  Their jetty limbs.------

                                           _Summer_, 811.
]

[Footnote 38: Labat, Vol. ii. p. 161. 163. and iii, p. 361.]




                              CHAPTER II.                               

       _Concerning the Geographical Discoveries of Mr. Park._


Since the scope and design of Mr. Park’s routes have been already
set forth in the beginning of the present work, it would be useless
to say more on that head; and as the particular map of his progress
will explain the relative circumstances of the Geography, nothing more
will be necessary, than to call the attention of the reader to such
particulars as may not readily occur to him on inspection of the Map;
or which, from their nature, cannot well be inserted in it.

The discoveries of this gentleman (as has been said before), give a
new face to the _physical_ geography of _Western_ Africa. They prove,
by the courses of the great rivers, and from other notices, that a belt
of mountains, which extends from west to east, occupies the parallels
between 10 and 11 degrees of north latitude, and at least between the
2d and 10th degrees of west longitude (from Greenwich). This belt,
moreover, other authorities extend some degrees still farther to
the west and south, in different branches, and apparently of less
height. One of these, follows the upper part of the Gambia river;
another the Rio Grande, to a low point of its course; and a third
appears to shut up the western coast of Guinea.[39] Accordingly,
this chain approaches much nearer to the equatorial parts of Africa,
than was before supposed; and thus we are enabled to understand fully
what Abulfeda[40] meant, when he said, that after the continent of
Africa has extended southward[41] from the Strait of Gibraltar, to the
neighbourhood of the Equator, it turns to the east, _passing at the
back of the mountains of Komri_, which give rise to the _Nile_.[42] The
mountains in question, then, ought to be those intended by Abulfeda;
who by the name _Komri_, evidently meant to express the _Mountains_
of the _Moon_; from which Ptolemy derives the remote source of the
Nile.[43] As Abulfeda supposed the source of the Nile to be very far
to the south or south-west (in which I agree generally with him), this
chain may be supposed to pass onward from the abovementioned quarter,
to the _east_, and _south_ of _east_, shutting up Abyssinia on the
south. This, at least, seems the only way in which we can fairly
understand Abulfeda; in confirmation of whose description, _a part_
of the ridge has been actually found by Mr. Park.[44] According to Leo
(p. 249), the country of _Melli_ is bordered on the south by mountains;
and these must be nearly in the same parallel with the mountains of
_Kong_, seen by Mr. Park.

Mr. BEAUFOY was informed that the countries on the south and south-west
of the Niger, lying opposite to, and to the westward of, Kassina,
were also _mountainous_ and _woody_. In particular in the line
between Kassina and Assentai, the country is said to be formed of a
succession of hills, with woods of vast extent, and some mountains
of a _stupendous height_.[45]

As the source of the Nile is confessedly very far to the south of the
parallel of 10 degrees north, this chain of mountains, admitting it
to continue its general easterly course, must bend to the southward,
after it passes Kong and Melli, in order to pass _above_ the sources
of the Nile; the principal of which I conceive to be situated in the
country of DARFOOR.

The highest part of the portion of this chain, pointed out by
Mr. Park’s discoveries, is situated between the 5th and 9th
degrees of west longitude; for within this space are situated the
sources of the Gambia, which run to the west-north-west; of the
Senegal, running to the north-west; and of the Joliba (or Niger)
to the east-north-east.[46] There is, however, a general slope of
the country, extending to a great distance northward, formed by a
gradation of summits of lesser mountains and hills, as is shewn by
the early part of the courses of the rivers; in particular, that of
the Niger, which appears to run near 100 miles on a northerly course,
before it turns finally to the eastward.

A large portion of the tract bordering on the northern foot of the
mountains, from whence the branches of the Senegal river issue,
is covered with thick forests. Mr. Park’s track on his return
lay through these woods; one part of which is named the _Jallonka
Wilderness_, in which no habitations were seen during five days of
forced marching. The hardships endured, even by the _free_ men of
this caravan, almost exceed belief.[47]

The head of the principal branch of the Senegal river is about 80
geographical miles to the west of that of the Joliba; and the head of
the Gambia, is again, about 100 west of the Senegal. The branches of
the latter are very numerous, and intersect the country for about
200 miles from east to west, in the line of the caravan route:
and it was this circumstance that detained Mr. Park, during a great
part of the periodical rainy season, in Manding; a state of things,
perhaps little expected, in a country regarded _here_, as the most
thirsty on the globe.[48]

We may conclude that similar circumstances take place, with respect
to the Joliba; only that as its course is such as to intercept all
the streams that descend from the Kong mountains on the south, whilst
Mr. Park’s travels along it, were confined to the northern bank, he
had no opportunity of knowing it, any farther than by seeing various
openings on that side; and by being told that he could not possibly
_make his way_ there. No doubt, it receives some large streams also,
when its course diverges far enough from the mountains as to allow
the waters room to collect.

At the lowest point to which Mr. Park traced it, and which (although
about 420 British miles in direct distance from its source) could only
be reckoned the early part of its course, it was a very considerable
body of water; the largest, he says, that he had seen (in Africa,)
and it abounded with crocodiles. The rainy season was but just begun;
and the river might have been forded at Sego, where its bed expands
to a vast breadth. Still, however, we must not estimate the bulk of
the Niger, that _Niger_ which was in the contemplation of Pliny and
the Romans, by the measure of its bulk at Sego, and Silla.[49] If we
suppose it to be the same river which passes by Kassina (and we know
of no other), which place is 700 miles, or more, to the eastward
of Silla, it would doubtless receive by the way great additional
supplies of water, and be at least a much deeper river than where
Mr. Park saw it. And here it may not be amiss to remark, for the use
of those who are not conversant with the subject, that rivers make
the greatest display of their waters, in proportion to their bulk, at
a moderate distance from their sources; and are often wider _above_,
than _below_.[50]

There can be no doubt but that the _Joliba_, is a noble stream; and
the prince of the _western_ rivers of Africa, as the _Nile_ of the
_eastern_: but the African rivers, however, rank lower than those of
Asia and America.

Mr. Park judged that the Senegal river below the falls of _F’low_,
or _Félou_ (as Labat writes it), was about the bulk of the _Tweed_
at _Melross_, in summer. This was indeed, in the dry season; but as
the river does not begin to swell periodically till many months after
that, Mr. Park, did not of course see it, at its lowest pitch. And yet
this was the assemblage of all the principal branches of the river,
save the _Falemé_, which was itself about three feet deep at the same
season. But the Senegal is even fordable in some places _below_ the
conflux of the Falemé, according to Labat:[51] for the Moors cross
it in the dry season, and commit depredations on some of the lands
to the south. However, almost the whole of the towns and villages
are placed on the south side, with a view of being in security for
the longest possible term.

The Senegal river then, is by no means a very capital stream,
except in the rainy season; when, like all the other tropical rivers,
its bed is filled, and very commonly will not contain the additional
waters. Mr. Park observed by the mark of the highest point of swelling
of the river _Kokoro_ (or eastern branch of the Senegal), that it had
been twenty feet higher than when he crossed it, in the line of the
southern route. The _main_ branch of this river, the _Ba-fing_, or
Black River, was not fordable, and was crossed over a temporary bridge
of a very singular construction. Alligators, or crocodiles are found
in all these branches, at the height at which Mr. Park passed them.

The Falemé river has also a remote source, and drains a great extent
of country.

Concerning the Gambia Mr. Park had fewer notices. It is remarkable
that the position pointed out to him for the source of this river,
agrees very nearly with that found in Dr. Wadstrom’s map; from
notices collected from another quarter. This is very satisfactory. I
learn also from Dr. Afzelius that the distance across, between the
approximating parts of the courses of the Gambia and Rio Grande,
is four journies.

Mr. Park crossed in his way, six different streams that fall into
the Gambia from the north-east. Amongst these the principal one is
the Nerico, which flows from the quarter of Bondou; and is reckoned
the eastern boundary of a tract which the Africans of this region
style the Country of the _West_, expressed by that of the _setting
sun_. This tract is on a lower level than that to the east; is flat,
and the soil composed of clay and sand. It appears that the whole
tract through which Mr. Park _returned_ is covered with wood, cleared
only in certain inhabited spots (_Numidian fashion_): of which, the
great tract, named the Jallonka Wilderness, is composed of primeval
forests.[52]

The Bambara and Kaarta countries are also exceedingly woody, but less
so than the other tract; and the woods are of an inferior growth.

According to the ideas collected from Mr. Park’s observations,
the general levels of the countries, near the sources of the great
rivers are thus distributed:

Between the countries of Bondou and Neola on the west, Bambara
and Kaarta on the east, the country forms a very elevated level,
falling _rapidly_ to the eastward; but only _by degrees_, to the
westward: and narrowing in breadth, from 330 miles in the south (in
the line between Bambara and Neola) to the narrow space of 60 or 70
in the north, between Kaarta and Kajaaga; and probably diminishing to
nothing, as it advances into the _Great Desert_; thus forming a great
triangular space, whose vertex is on the north of the little kingdom of
Kasson. This vast upland tract is divided into other degrees of level,
of which the highest comprizes the eastern and largest part of the
whole. The eastern boundary of this particular level, is, of course,
that of the upper level, generally, in the part where it overlooks
Kaarta and Bambara: and its termination, in the opposite quarter, is at
a _great descent_, west of the principal branch of the Senegal river,
in Woradoo; from which place, the edge of it may be conceived to run
northward, to join _another descent_ of the same kind, which forms
the falls of _Govinea_, over which the great body of the Senegal river
is precipitated, from this _upper_ level, to the intermediate one.

The upper level contains the political divisions of Manding,
Jallonkadu, Fooladu, Kasson, Gadou, and some other smaller states. And
the second, or intermediate level, contains Bambouk, Konkadoo, Satadoo,
Dentila, and some others; and is bounded on the south-west, by the
great slope of country at Kirwanney, where the waters first begin to
flow towards the west. On the north-west it is bounded by the great
descent which forms the _second_ or _lower_ fall of the Senegal river,
named F’low. This fall is about 30 miles below Govinea, 48 above
Fort St. Joseph: and here the river being arrived at the lowest level
of the country, continues navigable with little interruption to the
sea.[53] The Falemé river of course, must run on a far lower level
than the other heads of the Senegal river.

The Gambia has a small impediment to its navigation at Baraconda, in
the country of Woolli; but although this is usually termed a _fall_,
Mr. Park was informed that it did not impede the passage of canoes:
so that it ought more properly to be termed a _rapide_, according
to the _American_ phrase; that is to say, a _slope_, down which the
water runs, with more than ordinary rapidity, but which does not,
however, totally impede the passage of canoes, or small boats.

The Joliba (Niger) descends from the high level of Manding, into
Bambara, on the eastward, with a rapid and furious course, at Bammakoo,
about 150 miles below its source; after which it glides smoothly along,
and affords an uninterrupted navigation to Houssa, and probably by
Kassina to Wangarah; by the two first of which places, a very large
and navigable stream does certainly pass, under the same name as is
applied by the Arabs and Moors to the Joliba, that is, Neel Abeed,
or River of Slaves: a name that marks the idea of the people of the
country through which it flows, in the minds of those people.

Mr. Watt was informed, when at _Teembo_, the capital of the FOULAH
kingdom, in 1794, that in the way from thence to Tombuctoo, (concerning
which his inquiries were pointed) a part of the road, lay along the
side of a _Great Water_, to which they came in about thirty days
from Teembo. There can be no question but that the _Great Water_ was
the _Joliba_ river; whose very name, as we have said, in the Manding
language literally imports the same meaning: or more properly, the
_Great River_. Some have concluded that the Foulahs intended by it a
great _inland sea_; but this is highly improbable, although there are,
no doubt, such in other quarters of Africa, which serve as receptacles
for those rivers which do not reach the sea. But, in the present case,
the distance itself points to the Joliba; for, a month’s journey
from Teembo, would reach beyond Yamina, but fall short of Sego: and we
are told from the same authority, that in order to go to Tombuctoo,
they pass through the countries of Beliah, Bowriah, Manda, Sego,
&c. Beliah, we know not the situation of, but may conceive it to lie
on the north-east, or east-north-east of Teembo; because Mr. Park
points out Bowriah, under the name of Boori, adjacent to Manding,
which is obviously recognized in the Manda of Mr. Watt: and Sego,
there can be no doubt about. What is farther said concerning the
great breadth of the water, may either apply to the lake Dibbie,
or may be African hyperbole. The sense appears clear enough.

I have extracted in a note, the intelligence concerning the Great
Water: and also that, concerning the _Nyalas_. Mr. Park has also
heard of the _Nyalas_, or _Gaungays_, but is clearly of opinion that
the interpreter of Mr. Watt, either misunderstood the story, or was
himself misinformed.[54]


[Footnote 39: Meaning Serra Leona, &c. &c.]

[Footnote 40: Prolegomena.]

[Footnote 41: Abulfeda in effect, _literally_ meant _southward_; for,
like Ptolemy, and Strabo, he had no idea that the coast of Africa
projected to the _westward_, beyond the Straits, but rather supposed
it to trend to the _eastward_ of south.]

[Footnote 42: When the above is considered, we can understand that
Abulfeda supposed the bays of Benin and St. Thomas to be 11 or 12
degrees more to the _east_, than they really are; and he might well
suppose that “the sea came in at the back of the mountains that
gave rise to the Nile.”

That the _Nile of Egypt_, and not the _Niger_, is meant, we learn in
another place in the same author, where he speaks of the _Egyptian_
Nile, and traces it to Egypt. Prolegomena, article Rivers.]

[Footnote 43: _Komri_, or rather _Kummeree_, is the Arabic term for
_lunar_; and is the adjective of _Kummer_, the moon. [Mr. Hastings.]]

[Footnote 44: The mountains of Kong were seen by Mr. Park; but no
other part of the chain.]

[Footnote 45: African Association, 1790, and 1791, quarto
ed. p. 117. 123; octavo, 176. 186. Also quarto, 174; octavo, 260.

As two editions of this work are in the hands of the public, I have
referred to both throughout this work; distinguishing them respectively
by Q and O.]

[Footnote 46: The Rio Grande has its source very far to the south of
this chain; first running to the north, till it touches the foot of
this very ridge of mountains, by which it is turned to the west. [Vide
Mr. Watt’s Plan and Journal.]]

[Footnote 47: The caravan in question was composed chiefly of slaves
going from Manding to the ports of the Gambia.]

[Footnote 48: There is in Africa, a rainy season; and also a
periodical change of wind, as in the same latitudes in India: in
effect, a MONSOON.]

[Footnote 49: It may be conceived that the Romans, who, according
to Pliny, (lib. v. 4.), held the dominion of the countries as far
as the Niger, penetrated to it by the route of Gadamis, Fezzan,
Taboo, and Kassina, as the most direct, and convenient one, from the
Mediterranean. There are very clear proofs of the conquest of the
three former by Balbus. (Pliny, lib. v. 5.) It was known to Pliny
that the Niger swelled periodically like the Nile, and at the same
season; which we have also in proof from Major Houghton’s _Report_;
and from Mr. Park’s _Observations_. Pliny says, moreover, that its
productions were the same with those of the Nile. (Lib. v. c. 8.)]

[Footnote 50: In the Proceedings of the African Association, (Q
p. 122; O. 183, _et seq._) the river of Kassina is described to run
_to the west_, and _to pass on to_ Tombuctoo; where it is said to
be named _Gnewa_; possibly intended for Joliba, for the _n_ and _l_
are more commonly interchanged than the _m_ and _n_.[a] It will very
probably turn out that there is an error in the above statement,
and that it runs from W to E in the country of Kassina as well as
at Tombuctoo. It would seem also to be a larger river in the _east_,
than in the _west_; a presumption in favour of an easterly course. But
perhaps, the best argument is, that it certainly runs _from_ Tombuctoo
to the _east_. It must then either be one and the same river, or
there must be a receptacle common to both, lying between Tombuctoo
and Kassina! and we have not heard of any such. Much more will be
said concerning this subject, in the latter part of the Memoir.]

[Footnote a: Abderachman Aga calls it Gülbi; (or Julbee). Hartmann’s
Edrisi, quarto ed. p. 22.

It is incumbent on me to acknowledge the obligations I owe to
M. Hartmann, for his arrangement of the matter of Edrisi’s Africa;
and for his invaluable Elucidations, and Notes.]

[Footnote 51: See Labat, Vol. ii. p. 172, where the impediments to the
navigation are described. They do not appear to arise from differences
in the general level, but to a ledge of rocks.]

[Footnote 52: Thomson seems to have understood this, when he says,


  ------beneath _primeval_ trees, that cast

  Their ample shade o’er NIGER’s yellow stream.

                                            _Summer_, v. 705.
]

[Footnote 53: Labat, Vol. ii. p. 172. See his description of the
navigation.]

[Footnote 54: “I had a good deal of conversation with some men
of a particular tribe of Mandingas called _Nyalas_. These are great
travellers, and much respected by all the nations of Africa. It is
from _this nation_ that all the _Gaungays_ or workers in leather,
come; and they are likewise employed as the speakers on all embassies:
as they are not only good orators, but are so far privileged, that no
one, not even kings, can take offence at any thing they say. Any one
who travels with them, is sure of being protected; and, to use their
own terms, they can pass between contending armies, who will defer
the battle till they have passed. I inquired about Tombuctoo,”
&c.—One of them said, that “about a month’s journey beyond
Teembo, we should come to a _large Water_, which our eyes would not
be able to reach across; but which to the taste was sweet and good;
that we should then coast along, touching at different towns for
refreshment; but that there was one country inhabited by bad people,
who would rob and murder us, if they could; where we should not stop,
but keep far out, at a distance from the shore;” &c. They engaged to
carry him thither for the price of _four slaves_. [Watt’s Journal,
MS. p. 181.]]




                              CHAPTER III.                              

_Construction of the Geography of Mr. Park’s Expedition into Africa._


I next proceed to the detail of Mr. Park’s geographical
materials. Should it be objected that I have been too diffuse and
particular, in this part, I can only say, that since the information
itself could not, from its nature be correct, it became the more
necessary to investigate it closely, and also to place, not only the
_result_ but the _detail_ of the investigation, together with the
_original documents_ themselves, in the form of notes, in the hands
of the public, that the true grounds of the construction, might be
known. For whether it may happen, that no further lights should ever
be obtained, concerning the subject; or whether some other traveller,
more _fortunate_ (for he cannot possess more zeal, enterprize, temper,
or firmness) should complete Mr. Park’s work; in either case, the
original documents, as well as the mode of working them up, should
be recorded; in the _former_, that we may know how to _appreciate_
them; in the _latter_, how best to _improve_ them. The successor of
Mr. Park, cannot have too extensive a knowledge of the detail of his
predecessor’s work; in order that he may know what parts require
correction; and how to avoid delays, from a useless attention to
objects, that are already attained.

Two new Maps have been constructed for the occasion. The one contains
the PROGRESS OF DISCOVERY AND IMPROVEMENT in various parts of North
Africa; the other, the GEOGRAPHY of Mr. PARK’S EXPEDITION, as well
as the result of his particular inquiries in the same quarter; on
a more extended scale. The _present_ remarks and discussions refer
particularly to the latter.

In the construction of this map, it is first required to state those
points, on which Mr. Park’s _outset_ depends; as also those which
affect the position of Fort St. Joseph, near to which he passed; as
they differ from the maps in present use. And, as some positions in
the journey of Mess. Watt and Winterbottom, serve very much to aid the
improvement of the geography, it will be proper to speak of them also.

Cape Verd, and Fort St. Louis, at the mouth of the Senegal river, are
placed according to the observations and results of M. Fleurieu.[55]

Jillifrey, on the Gambia river is, from the mean of the longitudes
set forth by D’Anville, D’Apres, and Woodville, and which do not
differ amongst themselves, more than 4½ minutes.[56]

The detail of the coasts, as well as the lower parts of the rivers
between Cape Verd, and Cape Verga, are also from the charts of
M. Woodville. That part between Cape Verd and latitude 18°,
is adjusted to M. Fleurieu’s result of longitude, whilst the
particulars are from D’Anville and Woodville.

The course of the Rio Grande from the sea to the _break_ near the
river Dunso, is from Dr. Wadstrom’s map. The Dunso river, crossed
by Mr. Watt, appears evidently to be a continuation of the same river;
several branches of which flow from the south-east. And the high tract
of mountainous land beyond it, is no doubt a branch of the great ridge
above commemorated, under the name of Komri, in the work of Abulfeda.

The route of Mr. Watt is described from a sketch communicated by the
late Mr. BEAUFOY,[57] in which the scale appears, on a reference to the
original journal, to be intended for _British_ miles. I have regarded
them accordingly; whence Laby and Teembo are placed much nearer to
the coast, than Dr. Wadstrom’s map represents: for it appears by
the Journal, that Kissey, at the head of the river of the same name,
is no more than eight journies from Teembo. Nor has the map more than
120 geographic miles between them, admitting the scale to be British
miles, as I have concluded.[58]

The nearest point in Mr. Park’s route falls at 112 G. miles to the
northward of the extreme point of Mr. Watt’s; and the river Gambia
lay nearly midway between them. Thus, the map of Mr. Watt forms a
most useful point of comparison; and adds confirmation to the report
of the natives, respecting the course of the Gambia; for Mr. Park
was told, that it was _crossed_ in the way from the Falemé river,
to Foota Jallo, of which Teembo is the capital.

Pisania, on the Gambia (called also Kuttijar Factory), the place
of Mr. Park’s outset[59] is stated by D’Anville to be 170
G. miles above Jillifrey, by the difference of longitude; but by
M. Woodville’s map, no more than 156; which answers better to the
statement of the land journey; for Mr. Park was told that it was no
more than 6½ journies of a messenger.[60]

Pisania then, is placed in longitude 13° 28′, according to this
result; and in latitude 13° 35′ north, according to Mr. Park’s
observation, by sextant.

The causes of the _apparent wanderings_ of Mr. Park having been
explained in the former part of this work, it will be no farther
necessary to trace his course, than merely to explain the connection
of the different parts of the _data_ for the general construction.

Since the scale of the Map is fixed by the computed distances arising
on the intervals of time employed in Mr. Park’s route, it is
possible that some readers may be startled at the idea of following
such an apparently vague authority. Those, however, who have been
much in the habit of observing their rate of travelling, will be
easily convinced that distances _may be_ approximated; and those
in particular who have been much accustomed to travel in countries,
where _time_ regulates the _distance_; or who have been in habits of
working up geographical materials of this kind, will be the most easily
convinced. It will of course be understood, that calculations of this
kind can only be received from persons of judgment and experience:
and also, that when opportunities of checking them, occur, they are
always resorted to; after which, of course, no alternative remains,
but to adopt the corrected distance.

In the present case, the _rate of travelling of camels_,[61] does not
apply; as Mr. Park’s journey outwards was made on horseback, and his
return chiefly on foot. Nor are camels, indeed, in use in that line of
route. The checks to be employed, are the number of journies reported
by the travelling merchants, from different points of Mr. Park’s
route to Sego and Tombuctoo; and also those from the quarters of
Morocco, Tunis, and Fezzan, to Tombuctoo; using as a scale, the rate
arising on the route between Fezzan and Egypt, Morocco and Jarra, as
the _best known_ lines of distance. These, altogether, furnish such
kind of authority as will, I trust, lead to a satisfactory conclusion;
as the general coincidence is certainly very striking.

My mode of procedure has been, to calculate, in the first instance,
Mr. Park’s bearings and distances, and then to correct the bearings
by his observed latitudes, as far as these extend: and beyond that, I
have taken his bearing by compass, and allowed the _supposed quantity_
of variation.

The result of these calculations, together with the addition of his
line of distance from Sego to Tombuctoo, was then compared with the
popular report of the distance between the several stations of Woolli,
Fort St. Joseph, Bambouk, and Tombuctoo. It was found that these
reports did not materially differ from the aggregate distance given
by Mr. Park; although they fell short of it; a difference which might
naturally have been expected, and which I have ventured to alter. The
difference, however, does not exceed twenty-four geographic miles;
a mere trifle in African geography. The position of Tombuctoo, so
obtained, differs only half a degree in latitude, and still less in
longitude, from that arising from the intersection of the lines of
distance from Morocco on the NW, and Fezzan on the NE: of which a
particular account will be given in the sequel.

A great part of Mr. Park’s geographical memorandums are totally
lost: but fortunately his bearings by compass during a great part of
the way, are preserved. In other parts, he has preserved only the
calculation of latitude and longitude, arising from them; which,
however, of course furnish the means of obtaining the bearings,
if necessary. As he omitted to take observations to determine the
quantity of the variation of the compass, after he lost the means
of correcting his course by observations of latitude, which was at
Jarra, about midway in his route:[62] it becomes a question of some
importance, what quantity to allow on those long lines of distance
between Jarra and Silla; Silla and Manding.

It appears on inquiry, that the quantity of variation is no more
known, any where _within_ the continent of _Africa_, than within that
of _New Holland_. And it happens moreover, that the _lines of equal
quantities_ of variation, do not run across Africa with that degree of
regularity and parallelism, which takes place over great part of the
Atlantic and Indian oceans (at least this is what appears clearly to
my judgment): so that it became necessary to inquire, what quantity
prevails in the surrounding seas; and what the general direction,
as well as the _particular nature_, and _tendency_, of the curves,
of the lines of equal quantities?

The variation lines on the globe have occupied a good deal of
my attention at different periods of my life, and therefore the
application of such new observations as the assiduity and kindness of
my friends had procured for me on this occasion, was less difficult,
than if the subject had been new to me. A dissertation on the
subject, would be out of place here; and therefore I shall only give
the result of my inquiries, in abstract; after premising, that the
theoretical part belonging to the interior of Africa, is founded on
a _supposed continuation_ of those lines of equal quantities, whose
_tendency_ has been already ascertained, in the surrounding seas. I
am perfectly aware, that some may regard the assumption as too great:
but they will no doubt admit, at the same time, that it is difficult
to conceive a more probable arrangement: and what is much more to
the purpose, is, that if we are compelled to abandon the system,
in the gross, the quantity of variation in the line of Mr. Park’s
travels, cannot be greatly different from what we have assumed. For,
whether the line of 18° in the _south Atlantic_, be a continuation
of that in the _north_ Atlantic, or of that in the _Indian sea_,
much the same result will follow: only that in the former case,
the quantity will be somewhat greater.

[Illustration: CHART _of the_ Lines _of_ Magnetic VARIATION, _in the
Seas around AFRICA_.

_Published by James Rennell May 18th. 1798._]

It would appear, that between the East Indies and South America,
Europe and South Africa, there are _four_ distinct sets of what may
be termed _concentric curves_ of variation lines, on the globe,
and whose highest points of convexity are opposed to each other,
within the great body of Northern Africa. The accompanying sketch
will best explain it.[63] It would appear moreover, that from the
place of opposition of these curves, in Africa, where the quantity of
variation is 18°, it _decreases_ with great rapidity, and finally
to nothing, in going _eastwards_ to _India_, or _south-westward_
to _south America_: and that from the same point, it _increases_,
in going _NNW_, towards _Ireland_, or to the _opposite quarter_,
towards the coast of _Caffraria_. But the change is not in any
proportion so rapid in the _increase_, in going _north_ or _south_,
as in the _decrease_, in going _east_ or _west_. Such are the outlines
of this system; by which, if a person was to set out from Cape Verd,
or Cape Blanco, to traverse Africa from WSW to ENE, to Upper or Lower
Egypt, he would find at setting out, from 15½ to 16½ degrees of
westerly variation, which would increase to 18° about the centre of
the continent, and afterwards decrease to a less quantity than at
his setting out. Mr. Park’s travels being comprized between Cape
Verd and the centre of Africa, will therefore be in the quarter that
has from 16 to 18 degrees; and the part more particularly, where,
from the want of observations of latitude, we must depend on his
compass bearings, nearer 18° than 17°.[64] I shall now proceed to
the detail of Mr. Park’s materials.

Leaving Pisania, Mr. Park proceeded eastward to Medina,[65] the capital
of Woolli; and thence to the ENE, through the countries of Bondou,
Kajaaga, and Kasson; the two latter of which are separated by the
river of Senegal.

In his way, he took observations of latitude at Kolor, Koorkoorany,
and Joag, on this side the river: by which means we are enabled to
correct the parallels. The _distance_ at _present_ is left as it
stands in the Journal, with a view of correcting it afterwards. The
result of these bearings and distances (the particulars of which appear
below),[66] places Joag at 247 miles east of Pisania; and the latitude,
by two different observations, was found to be 14° 25′.[67]

At Joag Mr. Park was informed that Dramanet, which is about 2½ miles
to the _eastward_ of Fort St. Joseph, was 10 miles to the _westward_
of him. That fort is said to be in 14° 34′, or 9 min. north of Joag;
so that it ought to lie to the north-west, rather than to the west:
and accordingly, there is found, in the map in Labat,[68] a place named
Gacouva, no doubt meant for Joag, on the SE of St. Joseph; and in point
of distance answering to it. Other places in the same map of Labat,
are also recognized in the route of Mr. Park; so that the connection
between it and the French settlement on the Senegal, is very clearly
made out; which is a circumstance of some importance in this geography.

It will appear that the _reckoning_ kept by Mr. Park gave 89
min. difference of latitude between Pisania and Joag, whilst the
observation gave 50 only. About 9 minutes may be placed to the
account of _excess of distance_, and 30 will then remain, on the
whole distance of 253 geographic miles. In other words, the _dead
reckoning_, corrected by allowing 17 degrees of westerly variation,
gave a course of E 20°½ N; which, however, by the observations of
latitude, is shewn to be E 11°¼ N (or E by N) making a difference
of 9¼ degrees. But this I regard as coming very near, considering
the circumstances under which the reckoning was kept.

From Joag we accompany Mr. Park to Kooniakarry and Jarra. The
reckoning between the two first gives about 23¼ min. difference of
latitude, 55 of easting.[69] And hence the latitude of Kooniakarry
will be 14° 48′ by account; but the observation taken at Jumbo,
in its neighbourhood, giving only 14° 34′, the account is 14 to
the north; equal to about a point and quarter in bearing. The same
mode of correction has been applied here, as in the former part of
the route; that is, the _whole distance_ has been (for the present)
allowed; with the difference of latitude by observation; and hence
Kooniakarry will fall 59½ geographic miles to the east of Joag.

The route from Kooniakarry to Jarra[70] may be divided into two parts;
first, to Feesurah, a place of _observation_, south-eastward; and
secondly, to Jarra, north-eastward.

The account to Feesurah agrees very nearly with the bearings and
distance. The latitude by observation was 14° 5′, and the easting
from Kooniakarry, corrected, 47 miles. Then, to Jarra, the account
also agrees very nearly; the latitude was 15° 5′, that is, just
one degree north of Feesurah; and the easting from thence 33 miles.

The aggregate of easting, between Joag and Jarra, is then 139½
miles.[71]

It may be observed, that throughout this journey, generally, the
reckoning has been to the northward of the observations; and that,
by about _ten_ degrees on the _whole_ traverse, when 17 degrees of
variation have been allowed. It will hardly be supposed that the
difference arises from allowing too much variation by _ten_ degrees;
but it is singular, that the error should, in all cases but _one_, lie
the same way. I do not by any means regard the error as considerable,
circumstances considered:[72] nor is it of any consequence in the
parts where the observations of latitude serve to correct it: as
between Pisania and Jarra.

Mr. Park was plundered of his sextant at Jarra, which accident
of course put an end to his observations of latitude; and thus,
unfortunately, left the remaining _half_ (very nearly) of his geography
in a state of uncertainty, as to parallel. This point, therefore, must
be regarded as the most advanced geographical station, that rests on
any _certain basis_ of parallel. However, the remaining part of the
route will not appear to be much out, when it is seen how nearly the
bearing of Sego, as determined by Mr. Park, agreed with the line of
direction pointed out from Jarra.

It is, no doubt, a favourable circumstance, that the instrument was
not lost at an earlier period, and before the commencement of the
intricate route between the pass of the Senegal river and Jarra;
to which may be added, the advantage of a _known parallel_, from
whence to set off the very important bearing of Tombuctoo. In effect,
the bearing was pointed out from Benowm, but this place being nearly
east from Jarra, and the bearing in question E ½ N, no error of any
magnitude can be looked for.

Jarra (called also Yarra), has already appeared in the Maps drawn for
the Association, and was originally taken from M. Delisle’s Map;
but was neglected, or overlooked, by M. D’Anville. In the former
Map it was placed somewhat more to the west, and in a higher parallel
by about ¼ of a degree.

Between Jarra and Wassiboo, Mr. Park’s reckoning, as it appears
wrought up in his table of day’s works, gives 41 min. diff. of
latitude N, and 1° 31′ diff. longitude E; which reduced to
departure, in miles, is 89, and produces a course of E 26° S. But he
allowed _no variation_ after he left Jarra: and as I allow 17°, the
course must be taken at E 9° S, distance 96½ geographic miles. From
this arises a diff. lat. of 16′ only; departure 95: and, hence,
Wassiboo should be in latitude 14° 49′, and 95 east of Jarra.[73]

Mr. Park was so lucky as to preserve his original bearings,[74]
between Wassiboo, and Diggani (a place about 15′ short of Sego);
and _these alone_, out of all that were taken during the route. These
give a course of E 27°½ S, 174 geographical miles; so that when
17° of variation are allowed, the true course will be E 10½ S;
the diff. lat. 31,7; departure 171,1; whence Diggani should be in
lat. 14° 17′, and 266,1 east of Jarra.

Between Diggani and Sego (returning again to the table of latitude
and longitude), Mr. Park’s account gives E 43 S 15′; or corrected
E 26 S, which gives diff. lat. 6,6; departure 13,5: so that Sego,
the capital town of Bambara, falls, by this account, in lat. 14°
10′ 30″ and 279,6 east of Jarra.[75]

In this position, it bears E 10½ S from Jarra, distant 284
geographical miles. It is important to mention, that whilst at Jarra,
the bearing of Sego was pointed out to Mr. Park by compass, ESE, or E
22°½ S. His route made it E 27°½ S, or 5° more to the south. This
difference, so trifling in a distance of about 330 of our miles, on a
straight line (in other words, the distance from London to Edinburgh),
is not worth investigating. If we could suppose the report of the
natives to be true, it would place Sego nearly 25 minutes more to the
north. For my own part, I do not believe that any person, from mere
judgment, unassisted by geographical records, and so far removed as
to be out of the hearing of cannon, and of the view of conflagrations
(two circumstances that aid the most in fixing the line of direction
between distant places), could ever come nearer than _several_ degrees
of the bearing of two places that are 330 British miles asunder.[76]

Having at length reached the banks of the _long sought for_ river
NIGER (or JOLIBA), near which the city of Tombuctoo stands, Mr. Park
proceeded along it several days’ journey, towards the city in
question, on a course E 15½ N by compass, but corrected E 32½ N
70 G. miles; which giving a diff. lat. of 37½, departure 59, places
Silla, the extreme point of his expedition, in latitude 14° 48′;
and longitude by reckoning 0° 59′ west of Greenwich; but, as will be
hereafter shewn, when corrected, 1° 24′ west. Here, then, terminates
his journey eastward, at a point somewhat more than 16 degrees east of
Cape Verd, and precisely in the same parallel. The line of distance
arising from this difference of longitude is about 941 G. miles, or
1090 British, within the western extremity of Africa; a point which,
although short by 200 miles of the desired station, Tombuctoo, the
attainment of which would unquestionably have been attended with great
_eclat_, was yet far beyond what any other European, whose travels
have been communicated to the European world, had ever reached.[77]


[Footnote 55: That is, Cape Verd in latitude 14° 48′, longitude
17° 34′ west of Greenwich: St. Louis in latitude 16° 5′ (by
D’Anville), longitude 16° 8′ by Fleurieu.]

[Footnote 56:

  D’Anville    16°  9′  30″  }
                             }
  D’Apres      16   5    0   }   Mean, 16° 7′
                             }
  Woodville    16   8    3   }

        Latitude 13° 16′
]

[Footnote 57: The public cannot but recollect the obligations due
to this gentleman, on the score of his persevering industry, and
laudable zeal, in the work of extending our knowledge of the interior
parts of Africa. Accordingly his loss to society, in this department,
is likely to be felt for some time, if not for ever: the researches
in Africa being a path of his own choosing; a path which, more than
any other person, he had contributed to open, and to render smooth;
and in which he seemed destined to succeed!]

[Footnote 58: Dr. Afzelius supposes that the town of Kissey may be,
in direct distance, about 36 geographical miles to the north-east by
east of Serra Leona. Hence, Teembo should be no more than 156 from
Serra Leona. On the general map it is 170. I have adhered to the
bearing lines on Mr. Watt’s map; but think it probable that Teembo,
and the whole route may be _more to the south_.]

[Footnote 59: This is the residence of Dr. LAIDLEY, a gentleman to
whom Mr. PARK and the ASSOCIATION are under great obligations. He
received Mr. Park into his house, and treated him more like a child
of the family than a stranger. He cured Mr. Park of a serious illness,
which confined him for many weeks: and when Mr. Park was disappointed
of the goods necessary for his expences, which were to have been sent
out with Consul Willis, the Doctor supplied him with every possible
necessary, he had occasion for; taking his bills upon the Association
for the amount.]

[Footnote 60: A journey of an ordinary traveller may be taken at about
17 geographical miles in direct distance; that of messengers in India,
is equal to about 25, or 100 English miles by the road, in three days.]

[Footnote 61: See Phil. Trans. for 1791.]

[Footnote 62: The places of observation are marked on the Map by
asterisks.]

[Footnote 63: This sketch is not pretended to be minutely accurate;
it being morally impossible to procure recent observations in every
part, from the rapid change that takes place in the quantity of the
variation, in one and the same spot. However, the observations that
determine the course of the lines in the Atlantic (and which are
marked on the sketch) are from observations so late as 1793. The same
is to be said of those in the western quarter of the Mediterranean;
and those beyond the Cape of Good Hope, to longitude 30° east,
are of the year 1789.

It is obvious that a critical knowledge of the _quantity_ of the
variation in any particular place, and at a given time, is of less
importance to the present question, than that of the _bearing_ of the
_lines_ of equal quantities, at any _recent_ period: and this object
is, I think, tolerably well obtained, by the materials before me. Any
change that may have taken place since 1793, is in favour of a greater
quantity of variation, within the limits of Mr. Park’s travels.

In the Atlantic, the increase appears to be about a degree in seven
years. In the Indian ocean, less: and in the Red Sea, there seems to
have been little alteration between 1762, and 1776.

The lines, as far as they are founded on _authority_, are _continuous_;
but _broken_ in the parts _assumed_.]

[Footnote 64: It is in proof of the existence of this quantity of
variation, that, on closing Mr. Park’s route at Woolli, there
appeared to be only a small deficiency of distance on the Map, when
17° variation were allowed. Had the quantity allowed been less,
this ought not to have happened, as Jarra is placed according to
its latitude.]

[Footnote 65: Major Houghton’s point of outset in 1791 was
Medina. His route falls into that of Mr. Park at several points,
and finally branches off from it about 30 miles short of the Falemé
river, which the Major crossed at Calcullo, near 20 miles higher up
than Naye, where Mr. Park crossed it.]

[Footnote 66:

  -----------+-----+-------+--------+----------+-------+----------------
             |     |  G.   |Bearings|          | Lat.  |
             |Hours| Miles |   by   | Country  |by obs.|    REMARKS.
             |     |direct.|compass.|          |       |
  -----------+-----+-------+--------+----------+-------+----------------
  Pisania  } |     |       |        |          |13° 35′|
           } |     |       |        |          |       |
    to     } |  6  |  16   |SE by E |  Yani    |       |On these 
           } |     |       |        |          |       |bearings 17°
  Jindey   } |     |       |        |          |       |westerly
             |     |       |        |          |       |variation were
  Kootacunda |  5  |  13   |   E    |}         |       |allowed. The
             |     |       |        |}         |       |diff. lat. was
  Tabajang   | 2½  |   6   | E ½ N  |}         |       |then 89;
             |     |       |        |}         |       |departure
  Medina     | 5¼  |  15   | ditto  |}         |       |easterly 237.
             |     |       |        |}         |       |But the diff.
  Konjour    |  3  |   8   | E ½ S  |}         |       |lat. by obs. 
             |     |       |        |}         |       |being only 50, 
  Mallaing   |  2  |   6   | E by S |} Woolli  |       |the course 
             |     |       |        |}         |       |should be
  Kolor      |  5  |  12   |  ENE   |}         |13° 49′|E. 11¼ N.
             |     |       |        |}         |       |instead of
  Tambacunda | 5¼  |  14   |SE by E |}         |       |E. 20½, as
             |     |       |        |}         |       |before; and the
  Kooniakarry|  5  |  13   | E by N |}         |       |departure 247.
             |     |       |        |}         |       |But I have
  Koojar     |  3  |   9   | E ½ N  |}         |       |finally 
             |     |       |        |          |       |corrected
  At a well  | 13  |  34   | E by N |  Woods   |       |the easting, by
             |     |       |        |          |       |reducing it 24
  Tallica    |  4  |  10   |   E    |}         |       |miles, or to 
             |     |       |        |}         |       |223.
  Ganada     |  4  |  10   | E ½ N  |}         |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Koorkoorany| 4½  |  12   |  ESE   |}         |13° 53′|
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Dooggi     |  1  |   3   | E by N |}         |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Buggil     | 4½  |  14   | E ½ N  |} Bondou  |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Soobroodka |  7  |  18   | E by N |}         |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Naye       |  7  |  16   |  ENE   |}         |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Fattyacunda| 3¼  |   7   | ditto  |}         |       |
             |     |       |        |}         |       |
  Kimmoo     | 4½  |  12   | ditto  |}         |14° 25′|
             |     |       |        |          |       |
  Joag       |  6  |  16   | E by N |  Kajaaga |       |
]

[Footnote 67: According to this result, Joag would be in longitude 9°
12′, and Fort St. Joseph in 9° 21′; which is about 38 min. more
easterly than M. D’Anville’s Map of the Senegal allows: of which
more in the sequel.]

[Footnote 68: In Vol. iv. p. 92.]

[Footnote 69:

  ------------+-----+---------+-----------+----------+----------
              |Hours|G. miles | Bearings  | Lat. by  |Country.
              |     | direct. |by compass.| observ.  |        
  ------------+-----+---------+-----------+----------+----------
  Joag to   } |  —  |    —    |     —     | 14° 25′ }|        
            } |     |         |           |         }|        
            } |  7  |   18    |  E by N   |         }|Kajaaga 
            } |     |         |           |          |        
  Sammee    } |     |         |           |         }|        
              |     |         |           |         }|        
  Kayee       | 3½  |    9    |   Ditto   |         }|        
              |     |         |           |         }|        
  Teesee      | 7½  |   18    |  NE by N  |         }|        
              |     |         |           |         }|        
  Medina      |  —  |   12    |  SE by E  |         }| Kasson 
              |     |         |           |         }|        
  Jumbo       |  —  |   12    |   Ditto   | 14° 34′ }|        
              |     |         |           |         }|        
  Kooniakarry |  —  |    3    |  E by S   |         }|        
]

[Footnote 70: The register of the bearings and distance between
Kooniakarry and Jarra, being lost or mislaid, Mr. Park gave them from
memory only; but the observations of latitude at two places within
that space, were preserved, as well as the latitude by account at
two other places.

  --------------+-----+---------+-----------+-----------+--------------
                |Hours|G. miles | Bearings  |  Lat. by  |   Country.   
                |     | direct. |by compass.|  observ.  |            
  --------------+-----+---------+-----------+-----------+--------------
  Kooniakarryto |  —  |    —    |     —     | 14° 34′  }|   
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Soomo         |  —  |   17    |  SE ½ E   |          }|            
                |     |         |           |          }| Kasson     
  Kanjee        |  —  |   17    |    Do.    | 14° 10′  }|            
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Leekarago     |  —  |    8    | Easterly  |          }|            
                |     |         |           |           |            
  Feesurah      |  —  |   14    |  E by S   | 14° 5′   }|  
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Karancalla    |  —  |   18    | Easterly  |          }|            
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Kemmoo        |  —  |    8    |  E by N   |          }|            
                |     |         |           |          }| Kaarta     
  Marina        |  —  |   13    | Northerly |          }|            
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Toordah       |  —  |    8    |    Do.    |          }|            
                |     |         |           |          }|            
  Funingkeddy   |  —  |   12    |N by E ½ E |          }|            
                |     |         |           |           |            
  Simbing       |  —  |   16    |  N by E   |          }| 
                |     |         |           |          }| Ludamar    
  Jarra         |  —  |    2    |    NNE    | 15° 5′   }|            
]

[Footnote 71:

  Equal to 144 min. of longitude; whence Joag being
  by account in long.                                              9° 12

                                  Add 144 min.                     2  24
                                                                   -----
     Long. of Jarra, by Mr. Park’s original calculation            6  48
]

[Footnote 72: Mr. Carmichael came within 6 or 7 degrees in the
bearing between Aleppo and Bussorah, on a distance of 720 British
miles. But the advantages were prodigiously in his favour; the road
being straight, the country open, and the camel walking an equable
pace. (See Phil. Trans. for 1791.)]

[Footnote 73:

  ----------+-------+-------++-------------------------+-------+-------
            | Diff. | Diff. ||                         |   N.  |   E.    
            |Lat. S.|Lon. E.||                         |       |        
  ----------+-------+-------++-------------------------+-------+-------
  JARRA to  |       |       ||Doolinkeaboo             |   7   |  24    
            |       |       ||                         |       |        
  Queira    |  11′  |  25′  ||Diggani§                 |  19   |   8    
            |       |       ||                         |       |        
  Sherilla  |  14   |  40   ||Seracorro                |   5   |   9    
            |       |       ||                         |       |        
  Dama      |  11   |   4   ||SEGO                     |   6   |   3    
            |       |       ||                         +-------+-------
  Wawra     |   5   |   8   ||Lat. by account 13° 4′  }|       |        
            |       |       ||                        }| 121 S | 281 E 
  Dingyee   |   —   |   7   ||Diff. lon. 4° 41′ E     }|       |        
            |       |       ||                         +-------+-------
  Wassiboo‖ |   —   |   7   ||Sansanding               |  10 N |  15 E
            |       |       ||                         |       |        
  Satile    |  18   |  31   ||Sibiti                   |   —   |   7    
            |       |       ||                         |       |        
  Galloo    |   1   |  21   ||Nyara                    |   3   |  16    
            +-------+       ||                         |       |        
  Moorja    |   4 N |  14   ||Modiboo                  |   3   |  19    
            +-------+       ||                         |       |        
  Datiliboo |   9 S |  38   ||Silla                    |   2   |  12    
            |       |       ||                         +-------+-------
  Fanimboo  |  12   |  24   ||Lat. by account 13° 22′ }|       |        
            |       |       ||                        }|  18 N |  69 E 
  Jiosorra  |   7   |  18   ||Diff. lon. 1° 9′ E      }|       |        

No variation was allowed in this calculation.]             

[Footnote 74: Original bearings between Wassiboo‖ and Diggani.§

  --+-------------+--------+--------------+--
    |   Places.   |  Dist. |   Bearings.  |
    +-------------+--------+--------------+
    |Wassiboo to  |        |              |
    |             |        |              |
    |Satile       |  30    |   SE b E     |
    |             |        |              |
    |Galloo       |  20    |     ESE      |
    |             |        |              |
    |Moorja       |  15    |    E b N     |
    |             |        |              |
    |Datiliboo    |  25    |   SE b E     |
    |             |        |              |
    |Fanimboo     |  35    |     ESE      |
    |             |        |              |
    |Jiosorra     |  20    |     ESE      |
    |             |        |              |
    |Doolinkeaboo |  15    |   SE b E     |
    |             |        |              |
    |Lions        |  18    |   SE b S     |
    |             |        |              |
    |[a]Diggani   |   7    |    South     |
    |             |        |              |
]

[Footnote a: On working these bearings over again, it appeared that
Mr. Park had made a mistake; and thence inferred a wrong position for
Diggani, Sego, &c. in his table of latitudes and longitudes. I mention
this, to shew that he has acted fairly, in exposing his whole process;
and even his errors.]

[Footnote 75: This being equal to 4° 47′ difference of longitude,
Sego, by Mr. Park’s reckoning, would lie in 2° 1′ west of
Greenwich.]

[Footnote 76: The informant might possibly be influenced by the
bearing of _that portion_ of the road _nearest_ to him, which is more
_easterly_ than the part towards Sego.]

[Footnote 77: It may not be known to the generality of readers, that,
in the former part of this century, Tombuctoo was as much the object
of geographical research amongst the French, as it has been of late
with the English. D’Anville was particularly anxious about it, as
may be seen in the Mem. of the Academy of Inscrip. Vol. xxvi. p. 73.]




                              CHAPTER IV.                               

            _The Construction of the Geography continued._


At Silla, Mr. Park was informed that Tombuctoo was yet fourteen
journies of the caravan distant from him; and these he has calculated
at 200 G. miles only, in a direct line from Silla; as it appears
that a bend in the course of the river, prevents a direct line of
route towards it. As to the bearing, he unfortunately could not,
as at Jarra, obtain a consistent account of it. The natives always
pointed _along the general course of the river_; although, as it
may be supposed, it occasionally deviated to the right and left. It
has been seen, in the bearing of Sego, how nearly it was given by
judgment; but then the two cases differ very widely. The route is
entirely by _land_, from _Jarra_ to _Sego_, by which the idea of the
general line of direction is better preserved, than when broken into
so many small parts, by a _river navigation_, the more ordinary mode
of communication (as it appears) between Silla and Tombuctoo. There
were, no doubt, people, could Mr. Park have been able to meet with
them, who having made the journey by land, could have furnished him
with better information: but the reader, who already knows under
what suspicious circumstances Mr. Park travelled in this quarter,
will easily conceive that he was precluded from any communication
with _those_, who alone could have given the information: that is,
the _Moorish merchants_, and their dependants.

The bearing of Tombuctoo from Benowm, was pointed out to Mr. Park,
by a merchant of some consideration, who had resided at Walet, and had
visited both Tombuctoo and Houssa. But the _exceeding great distance_
of Tombuctoo and Benowm, (it being nearly twice the distance of Sego
from Jarra), will not admit such a degree of confidence in the report,
as to allow it to _supersede_ all other authorities, however it may
_aid_ the task of approximating the position. But, notwithstanding,
it will appear, that on the whole, it coincides most wonderfully with
the other _data_.

The bearing in question, pointed out at different times, was commonly E
by S, by compass: and Mr. Park never found his informant vary more than
half a point, which was to the southward; or E by S ½ S. But the idea
left on his mind, was E by S; which, allowing 17 degrees variation,
is about east half north; or more correctly, E 5¾ N. And hence,
admitting the distance of 200 G. miles between Silla and Tombuctoo,
which supposes a space of about 500 such miles between Benowm and
Tombuctoo, this latter would fall at about 50 minutes of latitude
northward from Benowm (whose parallel is the same with that of Jarra,
15° 5′), and consequently in 15° 55′. The _obliquity_ of the
intermediate meridians, might increase the parallel some minutes,
and we may call it roundly 16°.

Such then was the received opinion at Benowm, concerning the _parallel_
of Tombuctoo: for, it will appear, that the distance on the _Rhumb_,
which determines the difference of latitude, cannot be taken lower,
than has been stated.

If the _general course_ of the Joliba, after its escape from the
mountains, may be admitted to have any weight in the determination of
the question (since Mr. Park says, that they always pointed _along
it_, to express the line of direction, in which Tombuctoo lay),
this will point to a higher parallel, by about half a degree, than
the bearing from Benowm; that is to 16½ degrees. And, it may be
remarked, that the difference between these results falls yet short
of what would have arisen on an error of 5 degrees in the bearing;
such as was experienced in that of Sego from Jarra.

Mr. Park was informed whilst at Benowm, that Walet, the capital of
Beeroo, was ten journies distant, and this latter eleven journies short
of Tombuctoo. According to Mr. Park’s information, Walet stands at
about 240 G. miles, to the eastward of Benowm; (which would require no
less than 24 such miles per day, and appears out of rule, unless meant
for journies of _couriers_, which is possible enough.) But what is most
to our point, is, that by the information he received, concerning the
position of Walet, it appears to lie from Benowm, in the same line
of direction which points to Tombuctoo, when placed in 16½. Now,
as Walet lies in the shortest route from Benowm to Tombuctoo, one
might infer, of course, that it lies also the _nearest_ to the line
of direction towards Tombuctoo, of any of the places pointed out:
and, I confess, I am strongly inclined to adopt the highest parallel,
on this very account.

These alone, are the authorities for the position of Tombuctoo, derived
from Mr. Park’s observations and inquiries; and which differ, as
we have seen, no more than half a degree in the parallel: that is,
from 16°, to 16°½. The reader may recollect, that these are very
far indeed to the southward of those assigned to it, by M. D’Anville
and myself, in former publications; as we mistook its position so far,
as to place it between 19°, and 20°.

Before I proceed to state the authorities for its position,
derived from the northern stations, it will be proper to compare
the calculation of distance made by Mr. Park, with the reports of
merchants and travellers; in order finally to deduce the longitude
of Tombuctoo from the west; and afford a fair ground of comparison,
between the authorities from the opposite quarters.

It has appeared that Sego, _according to Mr. Park’s calculation_,
falls in latitude 14° 10′, longitude 2° 1′ west of Greenwich:
and accordingly, the direct distance between it and Medina, the
capital of Woolli, will be by this account 618 G. miles. Now, the
merchants reckon 36 journies between them. The daily rate between
Fezzan and Egypt having come out by construction 16,3[78] per day,
on 53 days, and about 16¼ between Morocco and Jarra, on 50 days,
I may venture to assume the highest of the two rates on 36 days;
and this gives about 587, or only 31 short of Mr. Park’s result.

Again, between Fort St. Joseph and Tombuctoo, M. D’Anville
(Mem. Insc. Vol. xxvi. p. 73.) allows 240 French leagues. These
are rated at 2,64 G. miles, or 23¾ to a degree, on his scale;
consequently there results a distance of 634 G. miles. M. Lalande
(Afrique, p. 23.) allows 250 leagues, which give about 660 miles. Ben
Ali went from St. Joseph to Tombuctoo, by way of Tisheet and Aroan,
in forty-eight days. The detour may be taken at eight days more than
the direct road (for Mr. Park furnishes the positions of Tisheet
and Aroan very satisfactorily), whence 40 remain, which at 16,3,
produce 652 miles.

Lastly, although the following be a very vague kind of computation,
it may not altogether be useless. Major Houghton’s guide undertook
to carry him to Tombuctoo, from Ferbanna in Bambouk, and to return
again in ninety days. Ferbanna is much about the same distance, as
St. Joseph, from Tombuctoo. Perhaps no more than ten days can well
be allowed for rest and refreshment, and then forty days will be the
length of the journey.

The mean of the three first reports, is about 649: and on the Map,
the space between St. Joseph and Tombuctoo, according to Mr. Park’s
result, is 667, or 18 more.

There is then, a difference of 31 only, on the accounts between Woolli
and Sego: 18, between St. Joseph and Tombuctoo; both pointing to an
excess, on the part of our traveller. I am however far from offering
these results, on the ground of inducing a belief that such _small
differences_ can be _ascertained_ by such _coarse_ materials; but
rather to shew that in the general scope of the authorities, there
was more of coincidence, than of disagreement, if the circumstances
are rightly appreciated.

As it appears, however, that Mr. Park and Major Houghton formed
different estimates of the distance between Medina and the river
Falemé; and that the former exceeds by about 36 miles; and moreover,
that on Mr. Park’s return by the southern route, he found by the
number and scale of his journies, that he had allowed too great an
extent to the space between the rivers Falemé and Gambia; I say, it
clearly appears that an excess may be admitted in this part. It may
be added, that, according to the report of the African travellers,
at Pisania, concerning the arrangement of the journies, there is an
excess on the west of Kasson; whilst the space on the east of it,
agrees pretty well. Or, strictly speaking, perhaps the space is
a _little under_-rated on the east, and _much over_-rated on the
west. If the mean of the differences between Pisania and Tombuctoo,
Fort St. Joseph and Tombuctoo, 31, and 18, that is, 24 miles be taken
off, the result will be satisfactory; as it agrees pretty well with
the excess found in the southern route, on Mr. Park’s return.

This naturally leads me to the discussion of the position of Fort
St. Joseph, as a point connecting the upper and lower part of the
Senegal river: or in other words, the routes of the French, _below_,
with those of the English, in the _interior_ of the country.

The French report concerning this position also points to an excess
of distance from the westward; even more than that arising from the
difference between Mr. Park’s reckoning and the reports of the
merchants; for it amounts to about 37 miles.

Could it be ascertained that a measured survey of the Senegal river,
to the height of Fort St. Joseph, had been taken, as Labat says
(Vol. ii. p. 157.) was actually done, by the order of the Sieur Brüe,
this would settle the matter at once. But _cursory_ surveys have so
often been called _actual_ and _measured_ ones, that one must be in
possession of better authority, before the survey of the Senegal river
can be relied on, as an absolute measure of distance. Nor is there,
in the list of places in the _Con. de Temps_, any intimation of the
longitude of St. Joseph by triangles, or measurement. Here follows
a statement of the means used in fixing the position of this place.

M. D’Anville, in his map of the Senegal and Gambia rivers (1751)
places St. Joseph 7° 44′ east of Ferro, which being in 17° 37′
west of Greenwich, Fort St. Joseph should be in 9° 53′. This is
32′ to the west of the position arising on Mr. Park’s route;
which gives 9° 21′. But M. D’Anville supposes a difference of
longitude of 6° 9′ 15″ only, between Fort St. Louis, at the mouth
of the Senegal river, and Fort St. Joseph: and as I have followed
M. Fleurieu’s ideas in placing St. Louis in 16° 8′ longitude,
St. Joseph of course falls in 9° 59′, rejecting the seconds; making
a difference of 37 G. miles, or 38 min. from Mr. Park; that is, 13
miles more than the mean of the differences between the authorities
for the position of Tombuctoo.[79]

It is obvious, that as neither St. Louis nor Jillifrey, are exactly
determined, in respect of Cape Verd, or of each other, it would be
idle to attempt a critical adjustment of them; and therefore I have
adopted the position arising from Mr. Park’s route, corrected by
24 miles, or 25 min. of longitude, more to the west; so that Fort
St. Joseph stands in the map in lon. 9° 46′, lat. 14° 34′.

In consequence of this correction, all the eastern positions, Joag,
Jarra, Sego, &c. must of course _recede_ 25 minutes to the westward of
the arrangement heretofore made, on the construction of Mr. Park’s
geographical materials. Hence I place

           Joag, in 9° 37′ west, instead of 9° 12′

          Jarra, in 7  13    ----------     6  48

           Sego, in 2  26    ----------     2   1

          Silla, in 1  24    ----------     0  59

  And Tombuctoo, in 1  33  east, ------     1  58[80]

I now proceed to state the reports of the distance to Tombuctoo,
from the NW, N, and NE.

From Tatta[81] on the southern frontier of Morocco, 9½ journies to
the SSE of the capital, (equal to 157 G. miles) the distance is 50
journies of the caravan, according to Mr. Matra.

From Mourzouk, the capital of Fezzan, (taken to be in latitude 27°
48′ and longitude 15° 3′ east, or directly south of Mesurata),
64 journies, according to the report of Ben Ali. And from Tunis,
77 journies, through Kabes and Gadamis, according to Mr. Magrah.

On the route between Mourzouk and Cairo, as well as between Morocco
and Jarra, it has been already stated (p. xxxviii), that 16,3 and
16,25 were the mean rates: and the former was accordingly adopted
between Woolli and Sego. At the same rate, the 50 days from Tatta,
give 815 G. miles, and the 59½ from Morocco, 970. The 64 from Mourzouk
give 1043; and the 77 from Tunis, 1255.

Now the above assumed position of Tombuctoo, falls exactly at the
given distance from Morocco through Tatta; and 18 short of that from
Fezzan (Mourzouk); but 61 beyond that from Tunis. The coincidence
therefore of the three lines of distance from the Gambia, from
Morocco and Fezzan, may be regarded as complete, since, in using the
same rate nearly across the whole continent of Africa, from Cape
Verd to Egypt, a difference of 18 miles only, arises. And hence,
the public mind may well be satisfied at present respecting this
important position. Whichsoever of the two determinations may be
right, is of little consequence: but I hold it to be more prudent
to adhere to that line which is the result of computation in detail,
and corrected as above, than to the long lines given in the aggregate,
and in which there is more risk of error. And thus I close the subject
of the position of Tombuctoo; placing it in latitude 16° 30′,
longitude 1° 33′ east of Greenwich.

Something, however, is proper to be said, concerning the rate of
travelling adopted on the present occasion, as it differs materially
from that allowed on long lines of distance, in the Proceedings of
the Association, in 1790. I there allowed 16½ for a single day,
but, diminished the rate according to the _length_ of the lines of
distance. It would appear that the proportion of diminution allowed,
although proper enough in countries, where obstacles interpose to
change the line of direction, is not applicable to that part of Africa,
where the great Deserts are crossed in so straight a line, as hardly
to increase the _simple_ winding, arising on each day’s course, in
any considerable degree; and that even the _simple_ winding is less
than elsewhere. And hence 16¼, or more, arises on the camel routes,
on long lines of distance, across the Desert; and on the pilgrims’
routes, where it appears the camels travel with light burthens. It was
through misconception of this rate, that I placed Tombuctoo, so far
to the north. I am ignorant of the cause of M. D’Anville’s error.

The particulars of the geography between Silla and Tombuctoo,
are copied exactly from Mr. Park’s map; and require but little
elucidation. Jinné, a large town, is two short journies below Silla:
and Tombuctoo, twelve still lower down. It would appear that all the
journies were conceived to be _short_, as Mr. Park allows only 200
G. miles for the aggregate of the 14.

Two days below Jinné, the Joliba expands itself into a considerable
lake, already mentioned by the name of Dibbie; from whence the river
again issues in a number of streams. These unite at a lower point,
and then form _two_ large branches, which separating widely from each
other, form an island near 100 miles in length, whose name being
Ginbala, or Jinbala, we recognize in it, the Guinbala country of
M. D’Anville; as in the northern branch of the river that bounds
it, the river of Guin, mistaken by him for the original head of the
Tombuctoo river (or Niger); as he also mistook the lake of Dibbie
for that of the Senegal river. Such were the errors in the African
geography, to the date of the AFRICAN ASSOCIATION: one of which errors
conducted the _Senegal_ river through 500 miles of the space which is,
in reality, occupied by the _Niger_.

The position of Houssa will be adjusted in the map of Africa.

The important station of Tombuctoo, being adjusted, together with the
positions dependent on it, I proceed with Mr. Park, on his return by
the south, to his original point of outset in the west: taking it up
at Sego, by which he passed in his way.

Along this line, an account of the bearings by compass was kept,
as well as circumstances would permit, until the instrument was
rendered useless, by robbers, near Sibidooloo. This was, however,
the most important part of the route, as it lay along the side of the
Joliba, the knowledge of whose course is, by this means, prolonged
to about 350 British miles. Mr. Park moreover committed to paper,
a tracing of its general windings; and obtained notices respecting
the place of its source, during his long residence at Kamaliah,
in the country of Manding, (commonly called Mandinga.)

Kamaliah is about 40 G. miles SW of Sibidooloo;[82] and to this place
Mr. Park contrived to extend his line of bearings from Sego. He also
learnt, that Jarra lay ten journies to the north-westward of Kamaliah;
which agrees satisfactorily to the result from Sego, as it leaves 154
G. miles, for the ten journies; and Kamaliah itself falls in lat. 12°
46′; 227½ from Sego, in a direction of W 21 S; corrected by the
allowance of 17° variation.

The town of Bammako, where the Joliba first becomes navigable
(or perhaps to which point it is navigable upwards, in a continuous
course from Tombuctoo), lies about fifty miles short of Kamaliah.[83]
It is reckoned by the natives, ten journies only from Sego.[84]

At Kamaliah the source of the Joliba (or Niger), was pointed out to
Mr. Park, at a bearing of south, a very little west, seven journies
distant; and for these, he allows 108 G. miles. The name of the
place is Sankary, and seems meant by the Songo of D’Anville; which,
however, he supposed to be at the source of the Gambia river, in the
kingdom of Mandinga. Such were the crude ideas heretofore entertained
of this geography.

Here it may be proper to mention, that Mr. Park, whilst at Kooniakarry,
in Kasson, in his way out, meditated a route to the south-eastward,
through Kasson, Fooladoo, and Manding; which route was to have brought
him to the Joliba in twenty days. The place on the Joliba is not
mentioned: possibly it might be Yamina. This route, however, he was
not permitted to take. Had he pursued it, his personal sufferings
might probably have been less; but our knowledge of the geography
would probably have been less, also.

It has been mentioned, that the space between Jarra and Kamaliah, is
checked by the report of the road distance between them. It is proper
also to state, as a further proof of the consistency of the respective
positions of Jarra and Kong, that the distance across, agrees generally
with the report of the Shereef Imhammed, who says, that Yarba, (meant
for Yarra, or Jarra,) is eighteen to twenty days journey to the NW
of Gonjah, meaning Kong. (Proc. Af. Assoc. chap. xii.) Mr. Park was
told that Kong, was ten journies to the southward, or SSW of Sego;
and he saw a part of the great ridge of _blue mountains_ of Kong,
as he coasted the Niger westward. These notices agree well with the
Shereef’s report.

Between Kamaliah and Woolli, there is yet a greater degree of
uncertainty respecting the _data_ for the geographical construction;
for in this long line of near 400 geographical miles, the line of
direction is collected from the places of the sun and stars; the
compass being useless, whilst the traveller was in motion. Besides, the
rapidity of the march, and the height of the woods, were unfavourable
to any attempts of that kind, had bodily fatigue and hunger, left
him either the inclination or the ability: for, in effect, it was one
long forced march through the Jallonka Wilderness, under the terrors
of famine, or being left behind to perish, by wild beasts.

Under such circumstances, it was full as much as could reasonably
be expected, to obtain some general idea of the line of direction,
on which he travelled; together with the proportional lengths of
the several intervals, by keeping an account of the time; leaving
the _absolute scale_ to be determined by the extent of the space. In
this, he succeeded so well, that the middle part of the line, when
produced to the capital of Woolli, appears to be no more than half
a point out of the bearing; as is shewn by Labat’s map of Bambouk
(Vol. iv. p. 92), in which the course of the river of Falemé,
which Mr. Park crossed in his way home, as well as out, is described;
and affords much assistance in adjusting his position on that river,
on his return.

It is first necessary to state, that M. D’Anville, in his map of
Senegal, &c. (1751) has totally disregarded the scale of Labat’s map,
as well as most of the bearings in it; having preferred to it some
other authority; perhaps some tracing of the two rivers. M. D’Anville
allows no more than thirty-seven geographical miles between the
two passes Naye and Kayee on the Falemé and Senegal rivers; when
Mr. Park allows sixty-two. Now Labat’s scale agrees with the
latter: for he allows 28¾ French leagues for this interval, equal
to 2,16 geographical miles per league, according to Mr. Park’s
calculation. The leagues were therefore probably of road measure:
as a league in direct distance appears to be equal to 2,64. Hence
M. D’Anville, seems to have misconceived the matter; and has applied
the same erroneous scale to the course of the Falemé river, upwards;
which he has shortened by about twenty-six geographical miles; carrying
that part no higher than to latitude 13°, which by the original
(or rather the proportioned) scale, should be extended to 12° 34′.

This Map of Labat, then, gives the position of Ferbanna on the Falemé
river;[85] as also the southern boundaries of Bondou and Bambouk,
with other particulars. Mr. Park, when at the pass of the Falemé
river, between Satadoo and Medina,[86] obtained some general notices
concerning his position, in respect of the above points. For he learnt
that Ferbanna (Tenda) lay at some distance lower down the river:
that Bondou (by the account of a fellow-traveller who was on his way
thither) lay six journies to the northward; and he learnt also the
general position of Bambouk. To this may be added, that he kept on his
right hand (to the N), and even touched the foot of it at Dindikoo,
a ridge of mountains, answering to that which, in Labat’s map,
crosses the Falemé _above_ Ferbanna; and which is also found precisely
at the corresponding point, with Dindikoo. Moreover, it preserves
in Labat, the same distance from the southern boundary of Bambouk,
as that seen by Park. And finally, it appears, by the description of
the southern route pointed out by the King of Bambouk (see Mem. 1793,
p. 11.), that Mr. Park passed to the _southward_ of Ferbanna, and
yet _not far_ from it. For the king’s road from Ferbanna (Tenda)
led eastward, through Concoudou (the Konkodoo of Park, a province)
as also through Silloumana, Gangaran, Gadou, and Manding. Now there
is every reasonable proof that (bating Ferbanna) this is the very
route by which Mr. Park returned. His route went through Gangaran
(Gankaran), on the one hand, Konkodoo on the other. Sillou-Mana is
very probably intended for Kullo-Manna,[87] a famous pass over the
_Black River_, or main stream of the Senegal, where a bridge of a very
singular construction is thrown across occasionally, for the use of
the caravans. It is unlikely that bridges should occur at _two_ places
in the southern route, and more particularly as the one at Manna is
placed there, because the steep rocky banks, and narrow channel of
the river, are peculiarly adapted to that kind of bridge.

It may therefore be concluded, that from Konkodoo, the king’s road,
instead of turning to the SW to Satadoo, leads straight on to the
westward to Ferbanna, and thence into the Woolli road, either at
Baneserile or Kirwanny; being a branch, only, of the great southern
road, leading directly across the mountains; whilst the other makes a
bend to the south, to avoid them; which bend, according to Mr. Park’s
description of his route, is so much like that in Labat’s map above
Ferbanna, that I cannot help suspecting the Dambanna of Labat to be
meant for the Dindikoo of Mr. Park. I return to the construction of
the route.

Ferbanna, in Labat, is placed 33 leagues on a bearing of S 11° E
from Cacullo, another pass on the same river Falemé, in latitude
13° 54′, by Major Houghton’s observation: and which is about 20
miles south of Naye, where Mr. Park crossed it in his way out. The 33
leagues according to the _proportional_ scale furnished by Mr. Park’s
route (2,16 each) give 71¼ G. miles for the distance of Ferbanna from
Cacullo: or latitude 12° 46′. From this point, Labat describes the
course of the river 24 miles higher up, in a SE by E direction. About
this place, we may suppose that Mr. Park crossed the Falemé on his
return; since it agrees with the circumstances of the mountains,
the bend of the road above described, and the distance of Bambouk
and Bondou; to which may be added, the general accordance of the
bearing from Manding. Medina, a village, stood on the west bank of
the Falemé, at the pass; and Satadoo, the capital of the province, at
two miles to the eastward of it. It is certain that neither Satadoo,
nor Konkodoo, appear in Labat’s map. In that, Macanna is the name
of the country bordering on the south of Bambouk; but Mr. Park calls
it Konkodoo, which means the _country of mountains_; and appears very
characteristic. (These mountains extend through Bambouk and Kasson,
and are productive in gold.) Again, Combregoudou in Labat, occupies
the places of Satadoo and Dentila in Mr. Park’s descriptions: and
we must therefore conclude, that either these countries have more than
one name, or have changed their names in the course of the century.

On the whole, it cannot well be doubted that the adjustment of
the southern route, to the northern, in this place, is tolerably
exact; and it is indeed a matter of the first importance to the
geography. One circumstance is very much in its favour: at Kirwanny
on this route Mr. Park was told, that the course of the Gambia river
lay three journies southward, or one journey within the boundary of
Foota-Jallo: and Dr. Afzelius was informed, that the same river runs
at the distance of four journies from the mountains which skirt the
Rio Grande on the north-east. These notices accord perfectly with
the relative positions of Kirwanny, and the course of the Rio Grande,
which are about 112 G. miles asunder, on the construction.

This adjustment, moreover, goes as well to the proportioning of
the longitudinal distance, on the line between Kamaliah and Woolli,
by means of the course of the river Falemé, extended from a known
point in the northern route.

On Mr. Park’s original map, I find 201 G. miles on that portion of
the southern line, east of the Falemé river; 181 on the west: whilst
the respective intervals on my construction, are 211, and 185. But
Mr. Park observed, that there was a greater portion of distance to be
travelled through, on his return, than he had expected. His reckoning
was, according to the sea phrase, _ahead of the ship_: which was,
no doubt, occasioned by his omitting to take the variation of the
compass into the account, after he had lost his sextant at Jarra.

It appears on the examination of his journal, that between the river
Falemé and Baraconda, in Woolli (a few miles short of Medina),
they employed nine whole days, and part of a tenth; a great part of
which journey lay through the wildernesses of Tenda and Simbani. Six
of the days are remarked to be either _long_ or _very long_: and one
in particular was a _very hard day’s work_. Allowing six miles for
the fraction of the day, the nine whole ones require 19 G. miles of
direct distance, each: and as the road diverged considerably from the
_direct line_ (to the southward, falling in with the Gambia pretty
high up) they may be taken somewhat higher. The five forced marches
through the Jallonka wilderness are also calculated at 19 each, direct:
and which may produce 25 road miles: I should conceive those through
the Tenda and Simbani wildernesses to be equal to 26, at a medium;
and some of them more than 30.[88]

Thus I have brought the grand outline of Mr. Park’s Geography
to a conclusion; and cannot do otherwise than sympathize with him
in his feelings, when he arrived at “_the hospitable door of_
Dr. LAIDLEY,” at Pisania, after an absence of eighteen months,
unheard of, during the whole time; whether enjoying the triumphs of
exploring new paths; whether pining in hopeless captivity, amongst
the barbarous Moors of Jarra; or fostered by the kind hands of
Mandinga Negroes.

                               * * * * *                                

It remains that something should be said regarding the connection of
Mr. Park’s Geography with that of Labat, between the rivers Senegal
and Falemé; as well as concerning the positions of the _falls_
of the Senegal river.

Labat’s scale has already been adjusted to Mr. Park’s, in p. xlv,
where 2,16 G. miles were found equivalent to one of Labat’s leagues,
in direct distance.

Kayee, the pass on the Senegal river, where Mr. Park crossed it,
is given at 16⅔ leagues above Fort St. Joseph, in Labat’s Map,
(Vol. iv. p. 92.) and the falls of F’low (Felou in Labat), 5½ still
higher up. Kayee may therefore be taken at 36 miles, and F’low 48,
above St. Joseph; the bearing a _point or more_ to the southward
of east.

F’low is the _lower_ fall, (below which the river continues
navigable generally, to the sea,) and Govinea, the _upper_ fall. The
distance between them is very differently represented, by different
persons; but I believe, is from 12 to 14 leagues, perhaps 30 G. miles,
direct. It is true that Labat says, in more than one place,[89] that
they are 40 leagues asunder; but as his Map (in Vol. iv. p. 92.) has
less than 12 leagues; and as M. P. D. also says (p. 78.) 12 leagues:
and as, moreover, the King of Kasson’s residence is said to be
_midway between_ the two falls; and that residence appearing to be
Kooniakarry, a place visited by Mr. Park; and which is no more than
about 22′ from the lower fall, and at 13′ distant from the north
bank of the river; it cannot well be otherwise than that the two falls
are within 30 G. miles of each other. And hence it may be concluded,
that _quatorze_ and not _quarante_, was in the original manuscript.

The distance between Kooniakarry and the Senegal river, 13 miles,
points to a WNW course, or thereabouts, of the river between the falls;
not much different from its general course, lower down. But as the
Ba-fing, or principal arm of this river, must run almost directly to
the north, from the place where Mr. Park crossed it, in Jallonkadoo,
it is highly probable, that the two great branches unite at no great
distance above the upper fall; for the same ridge of mountains that
occasions the fall, may, perhaps, occasion a junction of the different
streams above it.

These falls are said by Labat to be from 30 to 40 _toises_
perpendicular; or 180 to 240 French feet. We must recollect that
P. Hinnepen states the fall of Niagara at 600 feet, which subsequent
accounts have reduced to 150.[90] The reader will, however, find
very curious descriptions of these falls, and of the river itself,
in Labat, Vol. ii. p. 156, 160.


[Footnote 78: Strictly 16,292.]

[Footnote 79: It is proper to remark that M. D’Anville took the
longitude of Cape Verd 18½ min. more to the east, in respect of Ferro,
than M. Fleurieu: and Fort St. Louis, more to the west in respect to
Cape Verd, by 10¼ min.

M. D’Anville moreover, allows no more than 3° 2′ 30″
diff. lon. between Pisania and Fort St. Joseph, which by the _corrected
distance_ of Mr. Park, is no less than 3° 42′.]

[Footnote 80: The latitudes remain as they were.]

[Footnote 81: For further particulars respecting Tatta, see
Afr. Assoc. Q.; p. 225: and O. 333.]

[Footnote 82: It lies nearly midway between the Joliba and Senegal
rivers.]

[Footnote 83: Bammako, by Mr. Park’s original bearings, lies from
Sego W 8° S, 178 G. miles: and Kamaliah W 7°½ N, 51½. These are
corrected to W 25° S, and W 9°½ S.]

[Footnote 84: Perhaps the long journies of the slave caravans, such
as Mr. Park experienced, to the westward of this place.]

[Footnote 85: Not the Ferbanna of Bambouk, at which Major Houghton
resided; but Ferbanna Tenda, through which the King of Bambouk
described the southern route of the Slatees to lead, from Woolli to
Manding. (See Mem. Af. Assoc. 1793; p. 11.)]

[Footnote 86: There are several places of this name. The one in
question lies to the south of Bambouk.]

[Footnote 87: Kullo is a province of Jallankadoo, occupying both
banks of the Ba-fing, or Black River; and Manna the name of the
town. [Park.]]

[Footnote 88: Mr. Park seems to reckon 18 G. miles, in a direct
distance, a long journey: and 16 to 17 seems to have been his
ordinary rate, when left to himself. This is also the ordinary rate
of travelling, with those who perform journies on foot, or with
loaded beasts.]

[Footnote 89: Vol. ii. p. 156. Vol. iii. 290 and 358.]

[Footnote 90: See Ellicott’s Letter in Europ. Mag. Vol. xxiv.]




                               CHAPTER V.                               

_Construction of the New Map of North Africa.[91] — New Arrangement
of the Course of the Nile — Its distant Fountains yet unexplored
by Europeans. — A central Position in Africa, determined. —
Edrisi’s Line of Distance, consistent. — Errors of Leo._


In order that the reader may be enabled to judge of the improved
state of the new map of NORTH AFRICA, I shall set before him a list
of the authorities, together with an outline of the construction. To
enter into a detail of both, would require a volume: I shall therefore
barely _specify_ the authorities for the sea coasts, and for such parts
of the interior as have been aforetimes described by geographers;
and confine the _detail_ to modern discoveries, and to such parts,
as those discoveries have helped to improve: and more especially to
the points which determine the courses of the Niger and Nile.

The western and southern coasts, from the Strait of Gibraltar
to the Equator, have been newly constructed for the present
purpose. M. Fleurieu’s authorities have been followed in respect of
Cape Verd, Cape Blanco, and the Canary Islands. The coasts of Morocco
and Fez, rest on the authority of Don Tofino’s charts, in the Spanish
atlas: and between Morocco and Cape Blanco, various authorities have
been admitted, in the different parts: as it appeared to me, that
M. Fleurieu had not rightly conceived the position of Cape Bajador.

The coasts on the south and east of Cape Verd, are drawn in conformity
to the ideas of Captain Price. This gentleman, in the Royal Charlotte
East India ship in 1793, had an opportunity of adjusting the longitudes
of some important points; which longitudes Mr. Dalrymple applied to
the correction of the existing charts of the coast, and with his
accustomed liberality and zeal for the improvement of science,
permitted me to avail myself of the use of these corrections,
previous to his own publication of them, in a different form. It is
to the same invaluable Journal of Capt. Price, that I am indebted for
some of the most important notices respecting the variation of the
compass, along the coast of Guinea, &c.; and without which notices,
the approximation of the quantity of variation in the interior of
Africa, could not have been accomplished. (See above, page xxvi.)

The result is, that the coast of Guinea has several degrees _more_
of _extent_ from east to west; and that the breadth of South Africa
at the Equator, is _less_, than M. D’Anville had supposed.

No alteration has been made in the coasts within the Mediterranean,
save in the form and position of the Gulf of Alexandretta, and the
adjacent coasts.

The Red Sea, or Arabian Gulf, as well as the _whole_ course of the
Nile, have been re-constructed for the present purpose. For the
former, a great collection of new materials has been furnished by
Mr. Dalrymple. This includes a new chart of the whole Gulf by Captain
White, made in 1795: but I have not followed either _that_ or any
other _single_ authority _throughout_: but have made such alterations
as appeared to be warranted, on an examination and comparison of the
different materials.

The upper part of the Gulf, between Suez and Yambo, is however,
preserved entire, as Capt. White drew it.

The position of the Gulf, is thus adjusted:

Capt. White, by two observations of eclipses of Jupiter’s first
satellite, found the longitude of Suez to be 30° 28′ 30″ east
of Greenwich: and a mean of 76 lunar observations differed less than
a minute from the former.

The difference of longitude between Suez and Mocha, near the entrance
of the Gulf, is, by the mean of five different accounts, 11° 4′,
which added to 32° 28′ gives 43° 32′ for the longitude of
Mocha: and which is nearly a mean between the different results, by
timekeepers. But until a greater number of celestial observations are
taken at the mouth of the Gulf, its position cannot be deemed exact.

Cape Guardafui, is placed by _timekeeper_ observations, in 51° 12′
longitude: 11° 43′ of latitude.

The adjustment of the lower part of the course of the Nile, to the
shores of the Red Sea, differs very much from M. D’Anville’s
map. He supposed that the Nile, in its course from the lower Cataract
(near Syene) to Cairo, gradually approached towards the Arabian
Gulf: but late observations shew that it runs nearly parallel to it,
throughout that extent, which is about 7 degrees of latitude. Hence
the distance across, between the port of Kosire and Ghinna, on the
Nile, is much less than M. D’Anville supposed; he having allowed
about 110 G. miles, although 90 is about the truth.[92]

It may be proper to state, that the line between Kosire and Ghinna is
by no means the _shortest_, that can be drawn between the Nile and
the Red Sea, because it runs _obliquely_ between them. The distance
appears to be no greater than 72 miles on an ENE course, from Ghinna
to the nearest part of the coast.

Cairo, by the mean of several accounts, is about 59 G. miles to the
west of Suez, equal to 1° 8′ of longitude.[93] So that Cairo
should stand in 31° 20′. The _Con. de Temps_ has 31° 29′;
but it is probable that Suez is the best determined of the two places.

Mr. Bruce had observations of longitude at Kosire and Syene
(or Assuan). The first he gives at 34° 4′: and Capt. White at
34° 3′. But as Capt. White gives its latitude at 26° 18′,
whilst Mr. Bruce found it only 26° 8′, we may suppose that the
former did not approach the coast near enough to discriminate
particulars. Mr. Bruce’s parallel intersects the coast in
Capt. White’s chart, in lon. 34° 8′: and I have adopted that for
the place of Kosire. Capt. White may perhaps have mistaken the _old_
for _new_ Kosire.

Syene is given at 33° 30′ by Mr. Bruce, making 2° 10′ east
from Cairo; whereas M. D’Anville has no more than 41 minutes of
easting. Hence arises a difference of 12 degrees in the bearing:
M. D’Anville’s being about N 9 W; Bruce’s N 21 W: or nearly
parallel to the shore of the Red Sea.

The longitude of Sennar is 33° 30′ 30″ according to Mr. Bruce. In
this particular is found the widest difference between D’Anville
and Bruce; the former placing it no less than 3° 50′ more to the
west; that is, D’Anville has it, 1° 41′ _west_ of Cairo, Bruce
2° 9′ _east_ of it.

In effect, then, the general course of the Nile below Sennar lies to
the _west_ of north, instead of the contrary, as described in the
imperfect materials offered to M. D’Anville. For we cannot doubt
the _general_ truth of Mr. Bruce’s geographical positions, although
we may not be inclined to allow them every point of accuracy. In the
observation of longitude at Kosire, we have seen that he comes very
near to Capt. White: and his longitude of Cairo, is more exact, or
more in harmony with Capt. White’s observations at Suez, than the
longitude recorded in the _Con. de Temps_. We have moreover another
observation of longitude taken by Mr. Bruce at the eastern source of
the Nile, 36° 55′ 30″, (lat. 10° 59′), from whence one route
leads eastward to the shore of the Red Sea at Masua, another westward
to Sennar. Admitting his observations to be ever so coarsely made,
these routes must have afforded so considerable a check, to the
distance between Masua and Sennar, as to have precluded any very
great error, in a difference of longitude of about six degrees only;
so that there is little question but that M. D’Anville’s statement
is wrong.

From Sennar, Mr. Bruce has a new and interesting route, northward
to Syene. Dongola lay wide to the west of this route; and he has
not informed us on what authority it is placed in his map. Still,
however, the change in the position of the Nile, must carry Dongola
to the eastward with it, of course; and in Bruce’s map it is found
at 1° 18′ diff. long. to the east of D’Anville’s;[94] equal
to 73 G. miles. The latitude of Dongola is also ½ a degree to the
south of the parallel assigned by D’Anville, that is, 19½ instead
of 20°. With respect to that of Sennar, D’Anville was right.

In describing the western head of the Nile (and which has no existence
in Mr. Bruce’s map), it may be thought that I have advanced into the
regions of conjecture; but I trust that I have not gone beyond the
limits implied by the authorities. To enter into a detail of these,
together with the deductions and combinations arising from them, would
occupy too much room here; especially as they are designed for another
place. It may be sufficient to state, that the branch in question,
called the _White_ River, or _Abiad_,[95] is admitted by Mr. Bruce
himself, to be a more _bulky_ stream than the Abyssinian branch. That
M. Maillet was told, that it holds a course which is distant from
12 to 20 journies from the eastern branch. That Ledyard was told
at Cairo, by certain persons from _Darfoor_, that the Nile has its
fountains in their country situated 55 journies to the westward of
Sennar:[96] and whose _frontier_ province, _Kordofan_, is placed by
Bruce, adjoining to the west of the country of Sennar. And finally,
that Ptolemy, Edrisi, and Abulfeda, all place the head of the Nile
in a quarter far remote from Abyssinia. Ptolemy, in particular, has
described the eastern source, in such a way, as that it cannot be taken
for any other than the Abyssinian branch (_i.e._ Bruce’s Nile); and
yet he at the same time describes a larger, and more distant, source,
to proceed from the SW; answering to the White River. His _Coloe_ lake,
is clearly the _Tzana_ of Bruce: and may possibly have been meant to
express _Galla_, the name of the southern division of Abyssinia.[97]

Having completed this part of the subject, I proceed to the inland
positions in the western and central parts of the continent.

M. D’Anville has been followed in the geography of Barbary and
Morocco, with the exception of an adjustment of the interior of the
latter, to the coasts; which are drawn from the charts in the atlas
of Don Tofino, in which the capes of Cantin, Geer, &c. are placed
more to the east, in respect of the strait, than in D’Anville.

The lower parts of the Senegal, Gambia, and Rio Grande, are from
M. D’Anville’s, and Dr. Wadstrom’s maps.

Of Mr. Park’s route and discoveries, it is needless to say more,
than that the particular map which contains them, has been copied
into this; forming a most important member of it.

The routes and positions formerly introduced from materials collected
by the African Association, in the northern part of the continent,
are revised and reconstructed; perhaps with more effect, as our
knowledge and experience of the subject increases.

Fezzan is placed, as before, due south from Mesurata: its capital
Mourzouk, being 17½ journies of the caravan, distant. Edrisi affords
a slight check to the _bearing_, as well as to the distance, by means
of Wadan, which lies nearly midway, and is five journies west of Sort,
a known position on the coast: and also eight journies of his scale
from Zuela, a known position in Fezzan,[98]

A description of the caravan routes from Tripoly, to Mourzouk, Egypt,
and the Niger, will be found in the Proceedings of the Association,
published in 1790, and 1791 (chapters x. and xii.)

The point on which the _central_ and _eastern_ positions depend,
is GHINNY; or GHANA, (as Edrisi and Abulfeda call it) a city, and
capital of a kingdom situated nearly midway between the Indian Sea
and the Atlantic, on the E and W; and between the Mediterranean and
the Ethiopic Seas, on the N and S. Fortunately, this point, on which
so many others depend, can be satisfactorily approximated: though by
this, I do not mean to any degree of nicety, where an extent of 70
degrees, nearly, is in question.

According to Edrisi, Ghana lies 37 journies from _Germa_, through
Agadez, or Agadost. Germa, an ancient and ruined city of Fezzan, lies
to the ESE of Mourzouk, about four journies.[99] The position of Germa
therefore will be about lat. 27° 25′: lon. 16° 20′ E. Agadez
in 25 of Edrisi’s journies from Germa,[100] and is said to bear S
by W, or SSW from the capital of Fezzan.[101] Again, Agadez is given
at 48 caravan journies from Gadamis, which latter is 24 such journies
in a southerly direction from Tunis.[102] The road to Agadez makes a
considerable angle, by passing through Tegerhy, situated 80 miles only,
to the SW or WSW of Mourzouk:[103] and hence the direct distance of
48 journies must undergo some diminution. The result places Agadez S
by W ¼ W from Mourzouk, 479 G. miles distant; which only exceeds by
six miles the distance arising on the 25 journies from Germa: and its
position will be at a few minutes above the parallel of 20 degrees,
and a little more than half a degree of longitude west of Tripoly. The
position receives some further check, from the circumstance of Tegerhy
being midway between Kabes and Agadez.[104]

Ghana is 12 days of Edrisi’s scale to the southward of Agadez,
or about 229 G. miles.[105] It appears that Ghana lies somewhat to
the east of the line which passes through Agadez from Germa; whence
some little deduction should be made from the aggregate distance of
37 days, or 705 miles; and I have therefore taken 700 as the general
line of distance from Germa to Ghana.

Mr. Matra was told, at Morocco, that Ghinny (Ghana of Edrisi)
was 40 journies from Kabra, the port of Tombuctoo, along the bank
of the Niger. These, taken at the caravan rate between Fezzan and
Egypt; Morocco and Jarra; &c. that is at 16,3 per day, produce
652 G. miles. The intersection of this line with that from Germa,
places Ghana in lat. 16° 10′, lon. 13° 2′ E of Greenwich;
in which position it stands at 760 miles from the city of Benin,
on the coast of Guinea.[106]

De Barros says, that when the Portugueze first explored the _Coast
of Guinea_ (about 1469) the king of Benin held his kingdom of the
king of _Ogane_, as his superior lord; and that ambassadors were sent
accordingly, to obtain a confirmation of his authority. The distance
of Ogane (doubtless meant for Ghana) from Benin, was stated to be 250
leagues of Portugal; which being of 18 to a degree, are equal to about
833 G. miles. And if from these we deduct ½ for the inflections of
the road, there remain 740 for the direct line; which, as the reader
will perceive, is very near the former result. Thus the determination
of this important point, appears satisfactory.[107]

Before I speak further concerning Ghana and Melli, with a view to
identify them with the same countries mentioned by Leo, it will be
proper to _close_ the line of distance eastward to Nubia.

Between Ghana on the west, and Dongola on the east,[108] the
interval on the map is about 1118 G. miles, in an E by N direction,
nearly. Edrisi gives a chain of distance between them: and although
we cannot ascertain the _exact_ bearing of the several parts, yet
enough is known, to enable us to approximate the general _bent_ of
it; which is to the _south_; and the degree of curvature seems to be
such, as to increase the distance 50 or 60 miles; say 55, and then the
line of Edrisi may be taken at 1173 G. miles.[109] Now as he reckons
66 journies, each will be no more than 17¾: and his usual standard
is 19, or 1¼ more. This difference may easily arise on some of the
longer portions of the line; which, although given in the aggregate,
may be broken into several parts, and each of them inflected from the
other in some degree. Such, for instance, may be the case of the line
of 30 days between Dongola and Kauga; although the bearing of it,
on the whole, is SW by W, or WSW. Therefore the interval of space
between Ghana and Dongola seems to be satisfactorily filled up. Or,
if we take the whole number of computed journies between Pisania on
the Gambia river, and Dongola on the Nile, at 158; of which 92 are
between Pisania and Ghana, 66 between the latter and Dongola; there
will be on the former, according to our construction, a ratio of about
16,6 G. miles per day, on the direct line; and 16,9 on the latter.

To the _northward_ of this line, and in the quarter towards _Nubia_,
are situated the countries or kingdoms of Bornou (or Kanem) Tagua,
Kuku, Kuar, and Zagawa: and in the quarter towards _Ghana_, are
Zanfara, and Zegzeg. Most of them are mentioned, as well by Leo,
as by Edrisi.

There is a route to the capital of Bornou given in the Proceedings of
the Association, 1790-91, by which it is placed at about SE ½ S from
Mourzouk, distant 660 G. miles; whence it falls on the map exactly
in the same parallel with Dongola, and at 524 miles to the west of
it: so that the country of Bornou occupies the middle space between
Nubia and Ghana; Fezzan and Sennar.[110] There is little doubt that
Bornou is the Kanem of Edrisi, said to border on Nubia. Angimi (or
Gimi) in particular, one of its cities, is said to be near Nubia,
on the east.[111] There is a city of the name of Kanem, in the way
from Fezzan to the capital of Bornou, as we learn not only from
Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS. but from a note in Hartmann:[112] but this
cannot be the capital of Kanem, intended by Edrisi; because neither
the bearings nor the distances to it, from Dongola and Nubia agree;
and also, because the bearing and distance from Dongola _do_ agree
exactly to the capital pointed out, by Mr. Beaufoy: and which Edrisi
names Matthan, or Matsan. This capital he places at 31 days journey to
the west of Nubia, whose position, however, is too uncertain to reckon
upon: but Abulfeda says that Zagua, or Zagara, is 20 journies _west_
from Dongola;[113] and Matthan, according to Edrisi, is eight journies
from Zagua, (p. 15). It has already been noticed that the capital of
Bornou falls in the same parallel with Dongola; and here we learn that
Zagua, is also in the same parallel with it; consequently, the whole
28 journies from Dongola, may be taken on the same _westerly_ bearing;
and the result will be, a distance of 534 miles; differing only 10
from the interval on the map. Consequently, the Matthan of Edrisi may
be taken for the capital of Bornou, pointed out by the above authority.

The countries of Zagua (or Zagara) and Tagua, fill up the space between
the kingdom of Bornou and Nubia. The former appears to be a small
province, perhaps a dependency of Bornou. The situation of its capital
is inferred above, to be eight journies to the east of that of Bornou.

Tagua lies between Zagua and Dongola, and its capital at 13 journies
from Matthan, (p. 15). Northward it extends to the tract of _Al Wahat_,
the western province of Upper Egypt. Thus, its position cannot be
mistaken.

The country of Kuku (this must not be mistaken for Kauga) lies to the
NW of Tagua; NE of Bornou; and joins on the NE to Al Wahat. This is an
extensive country, bordering on the Desert of Libya, and partakes of
its nature. Its capital of the same name is situated at 20 journies
to the _north_ of Kauga. It is also 14 to the _eastward_ of Tamalma,
which is itself 12 to the _northward_ of Matthan. Hence Kuku may be
approximated, in position. (Edrisi, page 13, _et seq._)

A river runs from N to S by Kuku, and is received into a lake at a
great distance from Kuku; perhaps the lake of Kauga: and the river
itself may form a part of that, said to run near Angimi,[114] of
which more in the sequel.

Kuar, or Kawar, lies to the northward of Kuku and of Bornou; and
extends eastward to Al Wahat. It is bounded on the north by that
extensive Desert which separates Egypt from Fezzan; and which contains
the _wandering_ tribe of _Lebeta_ or _Levata_; as also various _Oases_,
or fertile islands; amongst the rest, those of Augela, Berdoa, Seewah,
and that which contained the temple of _Jupiter Ammon_. This Desert
I regard as the proper Desert of LIBYA: and it may be a question
whether the tribe of _Lebeta_, although now found in the interior
of the country, may not have originally inhabited the sea coast;
and that the Greeks denominated Africa from _them_.[115] This was
the part of Africa the nearest, and first colonized by the Greeks;
and it is a known fact, that the _Adyrmachidæ_ and _Nasamones_, who,
in the days of Herodotus, inhabited the _coasts_, were at a succeeding
period, found in the _inland_ parts about _Ammon_ and _Augela_.

The capital of Kuar is by Edrisi placed adjacent to Fezzan; but
there is either some mistake in this, or I do not comprehend the
matter rightly. (Ed. p. 39, 40.) Tamalma, a city of Kuar, is only 12
days from Matthan (p. 14.), so that the Desert of Bilma, or Bulma,
must lie between it and Fezzan. Mederam Isa, another of its cities,
is said to be only two days from Zuela, or Zawila, a city of Fezzan:
and Izer, a third city, is placed in the same neighbourhood, and near
a large lake. Either then, these cities belong to Fezzan, and are by
mistake classed as belonging to Kuar; or they _really_ belong, as well
as Tamalma, (of which there is no doubt) to Kuar. I am inclined to
the _latter_ opinion, for the following reasons. In the catalogue of
places, in Fezzan (in Af. Assoc.) there is no mention either of Izer,
Isa, Bulmala, or of a lake near the former. But there is a remarkable
salt lake near Dumboo, on the northern frontier of Bornou, which from
its relative position to Tamalma, may well be the one intended by
Edrisi: especially as Bulmala, (p. 40.) which may be meant for Bulma,
occurs in the same neighbourhood. The salt lakes of Dumboo are said
to be situated in the Desert of Bilma;[116] which Desert appears to
be a prolongation of the Libyan Desert to the SW.

Zanfara is said by Labat, to be 50 journies from Tombuctoo.[117]
Leo places it between Wangara and Zegzeg; which latter, by the
same authority, being to the SE of Cano (or Ganat) Zanfara must
necessarily border on the NE of Ghana; having Bornou on the east,
Agadez and Kassina (which we formerly erroneously spelt _Cashnah_)
on the west. Here it may be proper to observe, that in the present
political division of Africa, Kassina comprizes generally the
provinces between Fezzan and the Niger; and that Zanfara is its
eastern boundary. Of course Ghana, which in the 15th century was
paramount in the centre of Africa, is now become a province of Kassina.

To the _south_ of the line between Ghana and Nubia, very few
particulars are known to Europeans. The knowledge of Edrisi, was
limited to this line itself: and the only country known to him on
the south of the Niger, was _Melli_, which he calls _Lamlem_. Nor
did the knowledge of Leo, extend beyond the countries contiguous to
the south bank of the Niger; nor to any country west of Tombuctoo;
although by mistake, he places Ghana and Melli, there. This may serve
to shew, that the people on the north side of the Niger, have very
little communication with those, who live beyond the great belt of
mountains, which runs across Africa, at about the 10th degree.

Nor did the inquiries of Mr. Beaufoy produce any thing more than the
_names_ of certain of the adjacent countries; the only one of which
that can be _placed_, is _Begarmee_ (perhaps the Begama of Edrisi)
said to be 20 journies to the SE of Bornou, and separated from it by
several small deserts.[118] It seems to be the country intended by
the Gorham of D’Anville.

Kororofa and Guber are said in Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS. to lie to the west
of Begarmee; the latter bordering on Wangara. Neither of these, can
well be in a lower parallel than 11° or 12 degrees. But _Darfoor_,
a country of considerable extent and population, and apparently the
farthest removed of any that has a communication with Egypt, is pointed
out to our notice by Mr. Ledyard, as has been already shewn.[119]

In the present limited state of our knowledge respecting the interior
of Africa, it would be mis-spending time to attempt to follow Leo,
in his detail of provinces and nations, in the parts remote from the
immediate scene of our discoveries; or of the routes communicated to
the Association. But it is of the utmost importance to the argument
respecting the _course_ of the _Niger_, that I should clear up
some of his errors regarding the positions of _Ghana_ (his _Ginea_)
and _Melli_.

Leo says, p. 248, 249, that the merchants of _his_ country (I
conceive he means Barbary) call the country in question, Gheneoa;
that its proper inhabitants call it Genni: but the Portugueze, and
other Europeans, Ginea.[120] He says that it is situated to the
_west_ of Tombuctoo, that is between Tombuctoo and Gualata:[121]
that it has an extent of several hundred miles _along the Niger_,
even to the place where it discharges itself into the sea. Again,
says he, the kingdom of Melli _borders on_ Ginea, _southward_; and
on the west, are vast forests, which extend to the sea. And finally,
he places the kingdom of _Gago_ to the _east_ of Melli.

Now nothing is more certain, than that the space on the west of
Tombuctoo and Gago, is occupied by nations, very different from those
of Ginea (by which Ghana is to be understood) and Melli: as also that
the space assigned by Leo, to Ginea, is a remarkably _dry, sandy_,
country; being either adjacent to, or forming a part of the Sahara:
whereas Ginea is described by him to be a tract, which, during the
inundations of the Niger, in July, August, and September, is inclosed
like an island.

It is however not improbable, that Leo, who it appears had visited
Tombuctoo (but who certainly never saw the Niger, which is about 12
miles beyond it), might confound the city of Jenné, which is situated
in a small island in the Niger, and to the west of Tombuctoo, with
the kingdom of Ghana (his Ginea), on the east: but as to Melli, that
is quite out of the question, in respect of any mistake of the like
kind; and could only be placed on the west of Gago, in order that it
might preserve its southerly position in respect of Ginea. Thus one
mistake seems to have produced the other.

The position of Ghana (or Ginny according to Mr. Matra), at 40
journies to the eastward of Tombuctoo, has been already detailed, in
page lix. And this is, no doubt, the Ginea intended by those, from
whom Leo collected his information respecting the country itself,
whose geography he has so much erred in.

The kingdom of Melli had been reported to Cadamosta, when he made
inquiries concerning the interior of Africa, about the year 1455. He
was told that Tombuctoo, (whose general position was not ill described
to him, at about 60 journies inland from Arguin,[122]) was supplied
with _mineral_ salt from Tegazza, 40 journies to the westward. That
the same salt mine supplied Melli, 30 journies beyond Tombuctoo,
the salt passing through the latter place.[123] (We must here suppose
that the _capital_ of Melli, called by the same name as the country,
is meant as the term of this journey). Hence we should naturally look
for Melli on the _eastward_ of Tombuctoo, as will presently appear,
and not on the SW, as is expressed in Astley.[124] No doubt, SE was
meant: for Edrisi has a city of the name of _Malel_, at 10 journies
to the south of Berissa,[125] and 12 from the city of Ghana: and
this position actually falls at 30 journies to the ESE of Tombuctoo;
agreeing to the distance reported by Cadamosta.

But Edrisi does not call the country _Melli_, but _Lamlem_. However,
it can be no other than the Melli of Leo, and Cadamosta: for Edrisi
says (p. 8 and 11), that it is situated to the south of Ghana and
Berissa, and has on the east the country of Wangara (Vancara),
which agrees to the tract in which Malel is situated. Hartmann
supposes, (p. 39,) with great appearance of truth, that Lamlem is
a transposition of Melli: and I have met with similar instances
in the translation of Arabic words and numbers. Thus Leo’s ideas
were evidently wrong, respecting the situations of Ghana and Melli;
which lie to the _eastward_ of Tombuctoo, although he places them
to the _west_. The place of Melli is occupied, in his description,
by Guber (which Mr. Beaufoy learnt, was to the south of Wangara);
whilst that of Ghana remains unoccupied; unless we suppose it to
be included in the empire of Tombuctoo, which is implied (p. 254),
when he speaks of Wangara (Guangara) as being troubled on the _west_
by the King of Tombuctoo, and on the _east_ by him of Bornou: and as
he also speaks of Tombuctoo as the largest empire in Nigritia, (p. 4.)

In the position of Wangara,[126] he is right; for it lies between
Zanfara, and Bornou: but he seems not to have known that it was
intersected by the Niger, and formed of its alluvions, as Edrisi
points out to us.[127] But Leo learnt one important particular as
a merchant, that the _southern_ quarter of it, produced _gold_,
in abundance. As I shall have occasion to speak more fully of this
country, when the _course_ of the Niger comes under consideration,
it will be unnecessary to say more of it, in this place.

Kassina is removed by Leo, from the banks of the Niger, its
proper situation, far inland, to the east of Cano, or Ganat,[128]
(p. 253.) This is another proof of his writing from hearsay. Kassina
is not heard of, in Edrisi; it no doubt was included in Ghana, at
that day.

Leo is silent respecting Tokrur or Tekrur. This appears to have been
the metropolis of the great central empire of Africa, in the time
of Edrisi and Abulfeda; and must have existed in later times; as the
Tukorol, to whose prince the Portugueze sent an ambassador about the
year 1493, may be taken for the same place. It may, however, have been
swallowed up in the empire of Tombuctoo, which was founded after the
time of Edrisi, and before the date of Leo’s writing. But as the
city of Tombuctoo gave name to the empire, so might Tokrur; and this
latter may have fallen so much to decay, as to be little known in the
present times: and this may account for Mr. Park’s not being able to
learn any tidings of it. And finally, as Leo had not heard of Houssa,
we may conclude that it is a city of a yet later date; and which
may possibly have superseded Tokrur. Such a fluctuation of names,
serves as much to confound geographers in the political division
of Africa, as the various opinions of those who have written on the
physical geography, do, respecting the relative position of places,
and the courses of its rivers.

                               * * * * *                                


   _Remarks on the Positions of the Salt Mines in the Great Desert._    

Edrisi understood that all the salt consumed in the kingdoms of
Nigritia (particularly along the course of the Niger), was brought
from _Ulil_, situated at 16 journies to the westward of Sala, and
erroneously supposed by him to be an island, situated in the ocean,
near the mouth of the Niger.[129] But by the _situation_, one would
suppose that the salt mines of _Aroan_, 10 journies to the NNW of
Tombuctoo, and in the road to Morocco, were meant; and from whence
Tombuctoo is at present supplied. It is not easy to guess how an inland
salt mine should have been mistaken for an island, in the ocean:
but it is certain that both Edrisi and Abulfeda, supposed the Niger
to discharge itself into the sea, near the meridian of Tombuctoo. Ibn
Al Wardi[130] speaks of _Oulili_, as the principal city of _Soudan_
(or Nigritia), situated on the _sea coast_, and having extensive salt
works, from which salt was carried to the other states of Nigritia.

Mr. Park mentions the city of _Walet_, capital of Beeroo, which may
perhaps be the _Oulili_ intended by Ibn Al Wardi;[131] but it has no
salt pits; for the inhabitants fetch salt from Shingarin, six journies
to the northward of it:[132] and Walet is more than 24 journies from
Sala, instead of 16, as stated by Edrisi.

Cadamosta and Leo, in the third and fourth centuries after Edrisi,[133]
say, that the people of Tombuctoo had their salt from _Tegazza_, 40
journies to the westward of that city; and that the salt was carried
so far to the east as Melli, which is opposite to Kassina. By Tegazza,
_Tisheet_,[134] the salt mine of Jarra seems to have been meant; but is
far short of 40 journies from Tombuctoo. Now, if in the 12th century,
salt was procurable so near to Tombuctoo as Aroan, or Shingarin (the
salt pits of Walet), why should they have fetched it from a place 30
or 40 days distant, in the 15th and 16th? This requires explanation:
for Edrisi states very particularly that salt was carried from _Ulil_
in boats along the Niger, and distributed amongst the nations on its
banks, from Sala to Kauga![135]

Mr. Beaufoy, quoted as above, says,[136] that there is a _salt lake_,
or lakes, in Bornou; from whence Agadez, Kassina, and certain states on
the south of the Niger, are supplied. This at least implies that there
are no salt _mines_ in the Desert, in the quarter _east_ of Tombuctoo.


[Footnote 91:

      Table of the principal latitudes and longitudes in the Map.       

  --------------+--------------------+----------+---------+--------
                |     In the map.    |  By M.   |         |       
                |                    | Fleurieu | Con. de |       
                +---------+----------+----------| Temps.  | Bruce. 
                |Latitude.|Longitude.|Longitude.|         | 
                |         |          |          |         |       
  --------------+---------+----------+----------+---------+--------
  *Cadiz        |36° 21′ N| 6° 19′ W |  6° 19′  |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   C. Spartel   |35  48   | 5  57    |  6   2   |   5 54  |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   C. Cantin    |32  33   | 9  15    |  9  11   |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   C. de Geer   |30  28   | 9  54    | 10  31   |   9 53  |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   C. Bajador   |26  20   |14  17    | 14  49   |  14 28  |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
  *I. Ferro     |27  51   |17  37    | 17  37   |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   C. Blanco    |20  47   |16  58    | 16  58   |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
  *C. Verd      |14  48   |17  34    | 17  35   |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
  †C. Palmas    | 4  30   | 7  41    |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
  †I. St. Thomas| 0  18 N | 6  37 E  |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Tunis        |36  44   |10  20    |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Tripoly      |32  54   |13  15    |          |  13 20  |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Mourzouk     |27  48   |15   3    |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
  *Suez         |30   2   |32  28    |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Cairo        |30   3   |31  20    |          |  31 29  |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Koseir       |26   8   |34   8    |          |         |*31 4  
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Sennar       |13  35   |33  30 30″|          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Source of    |         |          |          |         |       
   the Nile in  |         |          |          |         |       
   Abyssinia    |10  59   |36  55    |          |         |*36 55 
                |         |          |          |         |       
  †C. Guardafui |11  43   |51  12    |          |         |       
                |         |          |          |         |       
   Syene        |24  —    |33  30    |          |         |*33 30 
  --------------+---------+----------+----------+---------+--------

* The longitudes thus marked, are from celestial observation, either
at the place, or in the vicinage.

† From timekeepers: the two first by Capt. Price, the latter by
Capt. Richardson.]

[Footnote 92: Mr. Bruce reckoned 44½ hours of the caravan (with
camels) between Kosire and Kuft (that is Coptos), near Ghinna:
Mr. Irwin 46 from Kosire to Banute, situated at the Nile, at five
hours above Ghinna. The camel’s rate is 2½ British miles by the
road: consequently less than two G. miles in direct distance.

M. Savary had much the same idea of the distance; for he reckons it
33 French leagues. (Vol. ii. letter 2.) But his map has 70 G. miles
only: Pocock’s 90.

Mr. Irwin reckons the bearing WNW from Kosire to Ghinna; doubtless
by compass. The variation might be 13 to 14 degrees; whence Ghinna
would bear W 9° N from Kosire: Banute, which is stated to be about
five hours to the south of Ghinna, will therefore by this account
bear 1°½ N of W from Kosire. Mr. Irwin was certainly very near the
mark; though a little too much northerly. It appears that Banute is
in lat. 25° 47′ 30″ in D’Anville, and is 8 min. N of Negada;
at which place, Mr. Bruce observed the latitude to be 25° 53′
30″. Consequently D’Anville is 14 min. too far south in this
part. Apply this to Banute, and we have 26° 1′ 30″. Kosire lies
in 26° 8′, and Banute is then to the south of it, in reality, by
several minutes. At Syene, Mr. Bruce’s latitude is 11 min. north
of D’Anville’s. Not to go into extremes, I have taken Banute at
5 min. S of Kosire, Ghinna 3 min. N of it; or 26° 11′. D’Anville
places Ghinna in 26° 1′. It was of importance that these parallels
of the places should be adjusted.]

[Footnote 93: The principal authorities are the following:

  M. Niebuhr reckoned between Suez and the Lake of the
  Pilgrims, situated at 6,9 G. miles E 38 N from Cairo,        28h 40m

  M. Volney,                                                   29  —

  Dr. Pocock,                                                  29  15
                                                               -------
                                                  mean         28  58

  Add from the Lake to Cairo, as it is usually reckoned,        3  —
                                                               -------
                                        or say 32 hours        31  58
                                                               -------

But as there are (besides the just mentioned 3 hours, in a direction
of about 40° from the general line of direction) 3¼ hours more
between Suez and Ajerud, at much the same angle, a considerable
reduction of the direct distance must take place, probably about 1¾
hour: whence there remains 30¼. And as Dr. Shaw states the general
report of the distance to be 30 hours, it may be conceived that this
is the actual distance, by the _shortest_ route, which leaves the
Lake and Ajerud to the north. And for these, 59 G. miles direct may
be allowed. M. D’Anville allowed 60.]

[Footnote 94: That is, M. D. places it 36 min. _west_ of Cairo:
Mr. B. 42 min. _east_ of it.]

[Footnote 95: This must not be confounded with the _Neel Abeed_,
the name applied by the Arabs, to the Niger.]

[Footnote 96: See Mr. Ledyard’s communications in African
Association, for 1790,-91. He says 55 journies, _or_ four or five
hundred miles. There must, of course, be an error, either in the
number of the journies, or of the miles.]

[Footnote 97: Mr. Bruce has fallen into an error, which may mislead
those who do not attend to his map. He says, Vol. iii. p. 720, that
“the ground declines southward, from the parallel of five degrees
north:” but in the map at the end of Vol. v. the waters, as we have
just said, begin to flow southward, from the latitude of 8° north. I
believe, with him, that farther to the west, the southern slope may
not begin short of the 5th degree of latitude.]

[Footnote 98: The day’s journey of Edrisi is taken at 18 Arabic
miles, or about 19 G. in direct distance. Strictly speaking, it should
be 19,06, as 56⅔ Arabic miles are equal to a degree.]

[Footnote 99: Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS.]

[Footnote 100: Edrisi, p. 39.]

[Footnote 101: Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS.]

[Footnote 102: Af. Assoc. 1793, p. 29.]

[Footnote 103: Af. Assoc. 1790, Q. p. 88; O. p. 133.]

[Footnote 104: Af. Assoc. 1793, page 29, _et seq._]

[Footnote 105: Edrisi, p. 39.]

[Footnote 106: By some oversight, Ghana is placed in the map, too
far to the east, by 8 minutes of longitude.]

[Footnote 107: I cannot learn with any degree of certainty, from whence
the name GUINEA, applied to the SW coast of Africa, is derived. Some
have supposed it to be from the capital or country of the superior
monarch, in the interior of the continent; but it is certain that the
same name is applied by Sanuto (in 1588) to the coast between the river
Gambia and Cape Mesurada. But Sanuto may have taken the idea from Leo,
who was in an error with respect to the matter of Guinea, at large.]

[Footnote 108: Placed as above on the authority of Mr. Bruce.]

[Footnote 109: The chain of bearings and distances is thus ascertained:
Edrisi allows 66 journies between Ghana and Dongola: of which 36 are
between Ghana and Kauga; 30 between the latter and Dongola (Damokla
of Edrisi). Of the thirty six, eighteen are clearly shewn to point
_eastward_; partly by direct information, partly by the context. For
Kauga is said to be 10 journies to the _east_ of Semegonda:
(Ed. p. 13.) and between the latter and Sekmara, 8 journies, is about
E by S and W by N; as we learn from the triangle formed by the points
of Sekmara, Semegonda, and Reghebil; the latter place being six days
_southward_ from the former, and nine from Semegonda. And lastly, the
18 journies between Ghana and Sekmara, are checked by the _bearing_
and _distance_ between Reghebil and _Ghanara_; and the _distance_
between Ghanara and Ghana—(See the map). For Reghebil is said
(Edrisi, p. 12.) to lie 11 journies to the _east_ of Ghanara, whilst
the latter is also 11 journies from Ghana. The context shews, that
if _Sekmara_ is 18 journies from Ghana, and Reghebil 6 days _south_
from Sekmara, whilst Ghanara preserves the relative position above
described, that Sekmara must lie to the _eastward_ of _Ghana_.

Kauga ought unquestionably to lie to the southward of Dongola, by 2½
or 3 degrees. For it is 20 journies to the southward of Kuku, which
is itself about the parallel of Tamalma, which is 12 journies from
Matthan, the capital of Bornou; _northward_. And this Matthan, as will
be shewn presently, lies in the same parallel with _Dongola_. Thus,
I may assume, without any great hazard, an easterly bearing between
Ghana and Kauga; E 25 N between Kauga and Dongola.

For the authorities for the above particulars, see Edrisi, pages
10, 11, 12, 13. It would be almost endless to note each separate
authority.]

[Footnote 110: The capital of Bornou falls in lat. 24° 32′,
lon. 22° 57′. The empire is said to be very extensive; and its
sovereign more powerful than the Emperor of Morocco: Af. Assoc. 1790,
Q. p. 152; O. p. 229.]

[Footnote 111: Edrisi, p. 14.]

[Footnote 112: Hartmann’s Edrisi, page 63, note (_v._)]

[Footnote 113: Article Soudan.]

[Footnote 114: Angimi is a city eight days journey from Matthan, six
from Zagua; and towards Nubia and the Niger; consequently to the SE of
Matthan; and _apparently_, not far to the northward of Kauga. Edrisi,
p. 14.]

[Footnote 115: Mr. Park mentions a wandering tribe named _Libey_,
whom he had seen in his travels. He compares them, in respect of
their habits and modes of life, to _gipsies_.]

[Footnote 116: Mr. Park mentions a wandering tribe named _Libey_,
whom he had seen in his travels. He compares them, in respect of
their habits and modes of life, to _gipsies_.

f From the borders of these lakes, Kassina and other countries are
supplied with salt, by the people of Agadez, who annually employ
1000 camels in this commerce. Af. Assoc. 1790, Q. p. 157. 167; and
O. p. 236. 251.]

[Footnote 117: Labat, Vol. iii. p. 363.]

[Footnote 118: African Association, 1790; Q. p. 155; O. p. 234.]

[Footnote 119: African Association. See Ledyard’s Communications,
in Af. Assoc. 1790, 1791.]

[Footnote 120: Abulfeda, Edrisi, and Ibn Al Wardi call it Ghana,
and Ganah.]

[Footnote 121: Gualata is described by Leo to be situated 500 miles
from Tombuctoo towards Nun.]

[Footnote 122: He was told that Hoden or Whaden, was 70 leagues east
of Arguin, and Tegazza six journies from Hoden. Tombuctoo was 40 days
from thence. Astley, Vol. i. p. 20, and 577, 578.]

[Footnote 123: Astley, Vol. i. p. 578. Some Remarks on the Salt Mines
are added, at the end of this Chapter.]

[Footnote 124: Ib. Vol. ii. p. 74.]

[Footnote 125: Berissa is 12 journies west of Ghana, Edrisi.]

[Footnote 126: Guangara, (Leo.)]

[Footnote 127: Pages 11, and 12.]

[Footnote 128: It lies to the SSW of Agadez. Af. Ass. Q. p. 221;
O. p. 326. M. D’Anville mistook the _Cano_ of Leo (p. 253.) situated
at 500 miles from the Niger, for _Ghana_. But the _Ganat_ of our map,
in the road from Fezzan to Agadez, must be meant.]

[Footnote 129: Edrisi, p. 7.]

[Footnote 130: Hartmann’s Edrisi, p. 29.]

[Footnote 131: Oulili, Oualet?]

[Footnote 132: Mr. Park’s MSS.]

[Footnote 133: Edrisi wrote in the 12th century; Cadamosta in the 15th,
and Leo in the 16th.]

[Footnote 134: Mr. Park’s MSS.]

[Footnote 135: Edrisi, p. 7.]

[Footnote 136: African Association, 1790; Q. p. 157, 167; and
O. p. 236, 251.]




                              CHAPTER VI.                               

_The Subject continued — Course of the River Niger, at large —
has no Communication with the Nile — Ptolemy’s Description of
it consistent._


The course of the _Niger_ (or _Joliba_) as we have seen, is
established, by ocular demonstration, as far as _Silla_; and may, I
conceive, be _admitted_, as far as _Houssa_, about 400 miles farther to
the east, on the foundation of the information collected by Mr. Park;
since it agrees with the ideas communicated to Mr. Beaufoy, by an
intelligent Moorish merchant, who had navigated the river: and as it
agrees no less with the report of Mr. Magrah, obtained from Moorish
merchants at Tunis; and of Major Houghton from Bambouk. Thus, the first
700 G. miles of its course are _from_ WEST _to_ EAST; or rather from
WSW to ENE. There remains then, a space of _more_ than double that
distance, between Houssa and the nearest part of the Egyptian Nile,
near Dongola: and yet more, to the known parts of the White river,
or Abiad, the SW branch of the Nile.

I shall divide the matter respecting the course of this river, into
three heads. 1. Respecting the continuity of its waters, from Houssa
on the west, to Wangara on the east; without regard to the direction
of the stream. 2. Respecting the positive direction of the stream. And,
3, concerning its termination.


             1. _Respecting the Continuity of its Waters._              


Edrisi gives the most positive information concerning the course
of the Niger, or Nile of the Negroes, from east to west; deriving
it from the same lake through which the Egyptian Nile passes; and
describing it to terminate at 16 journies west of Sala (that is, a
little to the west of the position occupied by Tombuctoo); and near
the supposed island of Ulil before mentioned.[137] He thus cuts off
about 1000 miles of the breadth of Africa. This was an error common
to all the ancient geographers, as well as to those of Arabia: for
Ptolemy places the mouth of the Senegal river only two degrees more
to the west, than Edrisi does that of the Niger.

Abulfeda believed, with Edrisi, that the Niger had a common source
with the Nile, and ran westward.[138]

It is certain, that these _opinions_ furnish no _proofs_ of continuity
of course: but it may be supposed that there was some foundation for
them; especially as Edrisi says, that salt was carried upon the Niger
in boats from the island of Ulil, and distributed to the people on
its banks, from Sala to Wangara, and Kauga.[139]

Mr. Matra was told[140] that from Kabra, the port of Tombuctoo,
“people sometimes travelled _along the river_ the space of 40 days,
to Ginny (Ghana) a large city;” &c.

The Moorish merchant, with whom Mr. Beaufoy conversed, and whom he
speaks of as a clear and intelligent man, says, “That the country
of _Guinea_ or Ginny, is on the _same river_ with _Houssa_.”
(Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS.)

Edrisi, besides mentioning the cities of Sala, Tokrur, Berissa,
Ghana, and Ghanara, all of which he says are situated on the Niger,
remarks that the _country of Wangara_, to which Ghanara belongs,
is _surrounded_ by that river,[141] as it would appear by means
of a subdivision of its waters; for Gatterer says, that Ghanara,
one of its cities, stands on the _western_ arm of the Guin,[142]
by which name he mentions the Niger; of which more presently. Now,
as Wangara extends, according to Edrisi, 300 _Arabic_ miles along the
river,[143] this extent, together with the distance of Wangara from
Ghana, eight journies,[144] or 152 miles, makes up 496 G. miles of
the course of this river, eastward from Ghana; which being itself 500
miles east of Houssa, there will be 969 miles in _direct_ distance,
traced eastward of Houssa: or on the whole, as Houssa is 700 miles
below the source, about 1670 G. miles of water-course from the head
of the Niger, above Manding, to the eastern extremity of Wangara!

In addition to these authorities, I may state from Leo, that the people
of Tombuctoo convey their merchandize in boats (or rather canoes)
to Ginea, _by the Niger_: and that at Kabra they embark for Melli,
also. But it is proper to be noticed, that he says (p. 249), that
this communication with Ginea takes place in the _rainy season only_
(July, August, September), which would imply a deficiency of water
for navigation, at other seasons.[145] Leo, however, certainly never
saw the Niger, although he seems to report himself an eye-witness of
many particulars relating to it. His intelligence is therefore often
to be suspected; though it has probably happened, that being regarded
as an original author, instead of a compiler, he has given weight to
the systems of Edrisi and Abulfeda, respecting the course of the Niger.

Gatterer, as I have hinted before, calls the Niger, Guin, as well at
Tokrur and Ghana, as at Wangara.[146] Now we learn from Mr. Park,
that the northern branch of the Niger, above Tombuctoo, passes by
the town of Jinbala, and collect also from Labat, that it is named
the _river of Guin_: and here we have the same name extended even to
Wangara; a presumptive proof of the prolongation of the same river!

Edrisi speaks of the same Niger, or Nile of the Negroes,[147] also,
at Kauga, 10 journies to the east of Wangara; from which we collect
that he must have supposed, that this _emanation_ of the Egyptian Nile
(as he supposed it to be) first ran to the north, and then turned
to the west, through Nigritia. And if any consequence can be deduced
from his account of the conveyance of salt, along the Niger to Kauga,
where the catalogue of places supplied, ends, we should conclude that
he supposed the navigable part of the river, _ended_ at Kauga.

Although there can be no question that _a_ river named _Nile_
(or rather _Neel_), passes through the quarter of Kauga, Angimi,
&c. since Edrisi, Abulfeda, and Leo, speak of it, yet it would be
advancing too far within the region of conjecture, in this place, to
attempt to _decide_ whether it has any communication with the western
waters. I shall therefore reserve this discussion till the last; that
it may not be allowed to have any weight in the decision of the great
question concerning the continuity and direction of the Niger. Having
therefore, as I conceive, established the fact of a _continuation_
of the waters from Manding to Wangara, I shall next proceed to inquire
into the authorities for the direction of the stream.


             2. _The Direction of the Course of the Niger._             


Ocular demonstration has shewn, that its course is to the _eastward_,
as far as Silla: and no reasonable doubt can be entertained that
it continues the same course to Houssa, 400 miles farther to the
eastward, even if the information communicated to Mr. Park, could be
doubted. For the Moorish merchant before quoted, told Mr. Beaufoy, that
he had himself _descended_ the Joliba, from Kabra to Houssa, although
he had forgot the exact number of days employed in the navigation;
and whether it was 8 or 10 days, (Mr. Park was told 11). But one
circumstance dwelt on his mind; which was, that “by the favour of a
brisk wind, they returned to Kabra, _against the stream_, in as short
an interval as they went down.” (This is no new fact to those who
are accustomed to inland navigations, even of the natural kind.)

The same Moor added, “that from Houssa, _going still with the
stream_, boats went to Jinnee[148] and Ghinea; near the latter of which
was the _sea_, into which the _Neel_ (or Niger) discharged itself.”
That this Ghinea lies to the eastward of Houssa and Tombuctoo, has
been already shewn; and that at the distance of 40 land journies.

Edrisi says that the navigation from Ghana to Tirka (which latter
is in the way to Wangara, admitted by the same authority to lie to
the east of Ghana[149]) is _with the stream_ of the Niger:[150] and
if this be true, it ought unquestionably to have the same direction
all the way from Houssa.

To these notices, of which the most full and positive, is that of an
intelligent person who had visited the spot; are to be opposed the
reports of Edrisi and Abulfeda, who wrote at a distance, and from
the information of others. As to Leo, although his _declaration_
is in favour of the two Arabian geographers, yet his authority loses
all its weight, by his saying that the river runs to the _west, by
Tombuctoo_; a fact which, I presume, no one will be hardy enough to
contend for. And it will be found, that his _descriptions_ do most
completely do away his _declaration_: so that his testimony is turned
against himself by the very context. For after saying that it runs
_towards_ the kingdoms of Ginea and Melli, he says also that they lie
to the _west_, in respect of Tombuctoo. Now the contrary has already
been made apparent, in page lxv, _et seq._; so that in fact, Leo’s
descriptions go rather to prove, that the course of the Niger is to
the _east_, than to the _west_. But after all, his descriptions are
the result of hearsay, rather than of observation: and it is plain,
that his idea of the course of the Niger, was regulated by the supposed
situation of the countries it ran through. Nor had he in his mind the
Coast of Guinea, according to our acceptation of the term, when he
spoke of the country of Ginea: for in his description of Nigritia he
says, that the _sea_ on the _south_, was unknown[151] to him. Thus
the testimonies appear to be clearly in favour of an _easterly_
course of the Niger from Houssa to Wangara. I next proceed to the
question respecting its termination.


             3. _Concerning the Termination of the Niger._              


Mr. Beaufoy’s Moor farther says, that “_below Ghinea_, is the
_sea_, into which the river of Tombuctoo disembogues itself.”
This may therefore be considered as the _prevailing idea_ at Houssa
and Tombuctoo, at which places he had resided, altogether, about
12 years. By the word _sea_, it is well known, the Arabs mean to
express a lake also; (and even sometimes a river.) Edrisi and others
describe large lakes in Ghana and Wangara.[152] And when Leo says
that the Niger falls into the _sea_ which _borders_ on _Ginea_, it
is not improbable that the lakes of Ghana and Wangara are meant; and
that he was under the same mistake _here_, in supposing Ginea to be
in the neighbourhood of the sea, as in what relates to the position
of Ginea itself. In other words, that hearing from the natives,
that the Niger expanded itself into lakes _below Ghana_ (or Ginea),
he supposed the western ocean to be meant. For it appears (p. 2.) that
_he had heard_, that the Niger had its source in the mountains on the
_west_, and running thence to the _east_, expanded itself finally into
a vast lake: but misled by the supposed situation of Ginea and Melli,
he disregarded the information.

He also describes Ginea to be a country annually overflowed by
the waters of the Niger, but omits to say the same of Wangara, to
which the description more particularly applies. It may be, that
as Wangara in more early times formed a part of the empire of Ghana
(or Ginea), his ideas might have been collected from some history of
those times. I therefore consider his description of Ginea (p. 248),
to include both Ghana and Wangara.

Edrisi describes three large _fresh water_ lakes in Wangara, and
one in Ghana.[153] The description of Wangara appears to be that of
an _alluvial_ country, environed and intersected by the branches of
the Niger, and annually overflowed in August. Perhaps August was the
time of the highest flood: for Leo says that Ginea (apply this to
Wangara, also) is overflowed in July, August, and September; which is
indeed the season of swelling of the rivers of the tropical regions,
generally.[154]

From this description may be inferred the very _low level_ of
the countries of Ghana and Wangara; which level or hollow forms a
receptacle for the surplus waters of the Niger, collected during
the rainy season:[155] and whose _permanent_ lakes, apparently form
receptacles for its waters, during the dry season also. The country of
Wangara alone, is said by Edrisi and Ibn Al Wardi to have an extent
of 300 miles by 150 (_i.e._ Arabic miles, of 56⅔ to a degree);
and Edrisi’s statement of the distances through it, proves that
its length lies in the same direction with the course of the Niger;
that is, from _west_ to _east_[156] Now I have no kind of difficulty
in supposing that _any_ river may be evaporated, provided it is spread
out to a sufficient extent of surface: and it may be that the level,
or hollow, of Wangara and part of Ghana, may present an extent of
surface sufficient to produce this effect.[157] And hence these
countries must be regarded as the _sink_ of North Africa, at all
seasons. No doubt the inhabitants are amply repaid by the fertility
produced by the deposition of the waters: but besides this, in the
southern quarter of Wangara, they collect an incredible quantity of
gold sand, after the waters are gone off, which is carefully sought
after, as soon as the rivers regain their beds.[158]

It may be proper to observe, that, according to the estimation which
we ought to make, of the quantity of water collected into the Niger,
it ought not to bear a proportion to that, collected into the great
tropical rivers of Asia; since it receives no branches, but on _one_
side. Of course, it does not drain so great a surface of country,
as those which receive them on both sides. Moreover it drains only
the tract situated to _leeward_ of the great chain of mountains,
which opposes the main body of the clouds; so that more water is
discharged by the south, by the rivers of the Coast of Guinea, than
by the _inland_ rivers; or by those of Senegal and Gambia.

Ben Ali reported to Mr. Beaufoy, that “it was believed, that the
Tombuctoo river _terminated_ in a _lake_ in the Desert.”

On the whole, it can scarcely be doubted that the Joliba or Niger
terminates in lakes, in the eastern quarter of Africa; and those
lakes seem to be situated in Wangara and Ghana. That it does not
form the _upper part_ of the Egyptian Nile, may be collected from
_two_ circumstances: first, the great _difference_ of _level_ that
must necessarily exist, between the Niger and the Nile, admitting
that the Niger reached the country of Abyssinia. For by that time,
it would have run at least 2300 G. miles, in a direct line; and
near 2000, after it had _descended_ to the _level_ of Sahara,
or Great Desert. And the Nile, at the point where the White River
(which, alone can be taken for the Niger, if the idea of a junction
be admitted) falls in, has more than a thousand such miles to run,
before it reaches the sea; and has moreover two or more _cataracts_ to
descend, in its way. Besides, Abyssinia is positively a _very elevated
tract_. Mr. Bruce, (Vol. iii. p. 642.) inferred from his barometer,
that the level of the source of the Nile, in Gojam, was more than _two_
miles above the level of the sea: and this is repeated in pages 652,
and 712; where he says “fully” two miles.

Again, in p. 719, he says, that the _flat_ country of Sennar is _more
than a mile_ lower than the high country of Abyssinia, from whence
(says he) the Nile runs with “_little descent_” into Egypt. Hence,
the country of Sennar, and the mouth of the White River, of course, may
be reckoned _about a mile_, above the level of the sea. It may however
be asked, how this agrees with the idea of an easy descent?[159]

The second circumstance is, that the Niger throughout the tract of
Nigritia, in common with all the rivers of that region, swells with
the periodical rains, and is at its _highest pitch_, when the Nile
is under the like circumstances in Egypt. Now, considering how long
a time it would require, for the waters of Nigritia to reach Egypt,
the effect ought surely to be, that instead of what happens, at
present, the Nile ought to be kept up to nearly its highest pitch,
_a very long time_ after the Niger.

Nor can I believe with P. Sicard and M. D’Anville, that the waters
of Kauga and Bornou communicate with the river of Egypt. P. Sicard,
it appears, had learnt from a _native_ of Bornou, that the river which
passed the capital of _his_ country, communicated with the _Nile_,
during the time of the inundation, by the medium of the _Bahr Azrac_,
or Blue River.[160] M. D’Anville supposed this _Nile_ to be meant for
the river of Egypt; and the communication to be effected by the medium
of the lake of Kauga; and that it flowed into the White River opposite
Sennar. But the space of several hundred miles, which intervenes
between this lake and the White River, is very unfavourable to such an
opinion; even if the _levels_ could be supposed to allow it. I rather
conceive, that Sicard, not aware of the extensive application of the
term _Neel_, or _Nile_ (which in Africa seems to mean any great river),
concluded that the river of Egypt alone, could be intended; whereas,
I have no doubt but that the river which passes near Kauga and Angimi,
was meant: (no matter whether it joins the Niger, or otherwise;) for
Edrisi says, that Angimi, in Kanem, situated near the borders of Nubia,
is only three journies from the _Nile_ (implied to be _that_ of the
_Negroes_, that is, the _Niger_).[161] But Angimi must be more than 20
journies to the westward of Dongola, situated on the Egyptian Nile;
for Zagua is 20 journies from Dongola to the _west_,[162] and Angimi
6 from Zagua,[163] in a direction, which at least, _increases_ the
distance. Besides, a river of the name of _Nile_, or _Neel_, passes
by Kauga,[164] which is 30 days to the south-westward of Dongola:
and apparently about six from Angimi. Doubtless, this is the Nile
intended by the informant of P. Sicard; and can have no relation to
the Egyptian Nile, otherwise than in _name_.

But in the notices respecting the _western_ course of a river, or
rivers, from the confines of Nubia, Bornou, &c. I think I perceive
abundant reason for belief, that such a course of waters does really
exist; although perhaps, not exactly in the mode described.[165] There
are notices of a considerable river in Bornou (or Kanem) called the
Wad-al-Gazel, or River of the Antelopes, said to join the Nile during
the time of the inundations:[166] of another at Kuku, more to the
north, said to take its course _southward_, to the Nile.[167] Also,
of _a_ Nile near Angimi and Kauga, before spoken of. And finally,
Edrisi[168] says, that a branch of the Egyptian Nile, issuing from
the great lake at Tumi, in the south, forms the head of the Niger,
or Nile of the Negroes.[169]

Here it is well worth remarking, that Ptolemy describes a branch
springing from the SE about the parallel of 10°, and amongst the
_Nubi_, which branch flows into the _Gir_, a river distinct from the
Niger, and appearing to answer to the river of Bornou, &c. This accords
exactly with Edrisi’s idea; only that it does _not_ flow from the
_same lake_ as the Nile, separated from it only by a mountain. But
M. D’Anville, in my idea, interprets very fairly the scope of the
intelligence furnished by Edrisi, by supposing that the _sources_
of the two rivers (or the _courses_ of them) were _separated_ only
by a ridge of mountains.[170]

Leo says, that the head of the Niger is within 120 miles of the
country of Bornou, and in the Desert of Seu:[171] but these notices
must be regarded as extremely vague.

Certain it is, that if the _eastern waters_ of _Nigritia_ do not
run into the Nile (of which, in our idea, there does not appear
a shadow of probability) they must either be evaporated in lakes,
or lost in sands. The lake of Kauga offers itself in a position very
convenient for the purpose, and a river taken by Edrisi for the Niger,
is actually said to pass near it. It has also been shewn, that in the
idea of Edrisi, the Kauga lake communicated with the _western_ waters:
but whether this is true, or otherwise, it is not possible to decide.

I do not pretend to follow Ptolemy in his description of the rivers
in the interior of Africa, with that precision which M. D’Anville
has attempted: but _this_ circumstance is clear enough, that he
describes them to _terminate_, as well as to _begin_, _within_ the
continent. The same is to be said of Agathemerus.

It is apparent, that Ptolemy has carried the head of the Niger seven
degrees too far to the _north_, and about four, or more, too far to the
_west_: as also that his _inland_ positions in Africa, as well along
the Niger, as at a distance from it, are yet _more_ to the west of the
truth. But notwithstanding this geographical error, he proves that he
knew many facts relating to the descriptive part of the subject. For
instance, he places the source of the Niger, at the mountains of
_Mandrus_, and amongst the nation of the _Mandori_. It has been seen,
that the Joliba rises in the country adjacent to Manding. He marks also
a large adjunct to the Niger, from amongst the _Maurali_, in the south,
answering to the river from Malel (or Melli) in Edrisi. To these may
be added another particular of agreement. The _Caphas_ mountains of
Ptolemy seem meant for those of _Kaffaba_, a country 9 or 10 journies
to the eastward of Kong; 18 short of Assentai (or Ashantee) near the
Coast of Guinea.[172] But I have a doubt where to place Ptolemy’s
metropolis of Nigritia, in modern geography. His ideas, however,
corroborate in the strongest manner, the present system of geography.

Amongst the eastern waters, the _Gir_ of Ptolemy, seems to be
recognized in the river of Bornou, and its adjuncts: the Niger, in that
of Tombuctoo and Wangara. The _Panagra_ of the same geographer answers
to Wangara; and his _Libya Palus_, which forms the _termination_
of the Niger, eastward, seems to be meant, either for the largest
of the lakes, or for the lakes of that country (of which there are
several), _collectively_. It is no impeachment of this opinion, that
the _Libya Palus_ is placed so far to the west as the meridian of
Carthage, whilst the lakes of Wangara appear to be in that of Cyrene:
for Ptolemy carries the river Gir, and the capital of the country
which represents Bornou, into the centre of Africa; by which he has
_shortened_ the course of the Niger, in the same proportion as he
had _extended_ that of the Gir, or Wad-al-Gazel. Modern geographers,
to the time of D’Anville, were guilty of the same kind of error:
Ghana is about 6° too far west, in Delisle’s map.

It may be best to omit any farther remarks on Ptolemy, at present,
and to wait the result of future discoveries. In the mean time, those
who are curious to read M. D’Anville’s Memoir on the subject
of “the Rivers in the interior of Africa,” will find it in the
Mém. Acad. Inscrip. Vol. xxvi.


[Footnote 137: Page 7 of Edrisi.]

[Footnote 138: Article _Soudan_.]

[Footnote 139: Edrisi, page 7.]

[Footnote 140: Mr. Beaufoy’s MSS.]

[Footnote 141: Edrisi, p. 7. 11. and 12.]

[Footnote 142: Hartmann’s Edrisi, p. 48, notes.]

[Footnote 143: Edrisi, p. 11.]

[Footnote 144: Ib. p. 11.]

[Footnote 145: If this report of Leo has any _particular meaning_,
and as the river in question carries a great body of water at all
seasons, one must suppose that there are _falls_ or _rapids_, in the
river, when in its low state. Time may discover.]

[Footnote 146: Hartmann, p. 32, 48, 51.]

[Footnote 147: Edrisi, p. 7, and 13.]

[Footnote 148: It is certain that one city of Jinné or Jinnee stands
_above_ Tombuctoo and Houssa.]

[Footnote 149: Edrisi, p. 9, 11, and 12.]

[Footnote 150: Sionita, p. 12, translates the passage thus: “_Via
cursum Nili comitante_.” And Hartmann, p. 51, “_Nilum sequere_.”

D’Herbelot understood the same thing; article _Vankara_.]

[Footnote 151: Leo, p. 2.]

[Footnote 152: Edrisi, p. 10, 12, 13.]

[Footnote 153: See Edrisi, p. 10, 11, 12, 13.]

[Footnote 154: Ib. p. 11, _et seq._ Hartmann, p. 47, _et seq._]

[Footnote 155: And that probably, not only for the western waters,
alone, but for the _eastern_ also.]

[Footnote 156: Refer to Edrisi, p. 12, and 13; and to page lx above.]

[Footnote 157: There are many instances of this kind. In particular the
_Hindmend_, or _Heermund_, a very considerable river of _Sigistan_,
terminates in the lake of Zurrah (_Aria Palus_). The lake is about
100 miles long, and 20 broad, at the widest part; and is said to be
_fresh_. The country it flows through, has all the characteristics
of the alluvial tracts, at the mouths of great rivers; as Egypt,
Bengal, &c. and is environed by mountains. This was the celebrated
tract which is said to have formed the _appanage_ of _Rustum_; and
whose inhabitants, from the relief they afforded to CYRUS, were named
_Euergetæ_ by Alexander.]

[Footnote 158: Edrisi, p. 12. D’Herbelot, article Vankara.]

[Footnote 159: Mr. Bruce mentions eight cataracts of the Nile; of
which, _two_ only are _below_ Sennar. (Vol. iii. p. 644, _et seq._)
M. D’Anville marks _three_ within the same space. The principal
cataracts are those formed by the abrupt descent from the _upper_
level of Gojam, to the _intermediate_ one of Sennar; one of them
being 280 feet. (See page 647.)]

[Footnote 160: Mém. Acad. Inscrip. Vol. xxvi. p. 67. _Azrac_, or
_blue_, is a term applied to certain rivers, by the Arabs, as _Melas_,
or _black_, by the Greeks. It is applied in Abyssinia to the eastern
branch of the Nile, seemingly in contradistinction to the _Bahr Abiad_,
or _White_ River; whose waters are _muddy_, whilst those of the other
are remarkably _clear_.]

[Footnote 161: Edrisi, p. 14.]

[Footnote 162: Abulfeda, article Soudan.]

[Footnote 163: Edrisi, p. 14.]

[Footnote 164: Edrisi. p. 7.]

[Footnote 165: I am aware that Mr. Beaufoy was told that the river of
Bornou runs to the NW, into the Desert of Bilma. [Af. Assoc. Q. p. 142:
O. 215.]]

[Footnote 166: D’Anville, Mém. Inscrip. Vol. xxvi. p. 67.]

[Footnote 167: Edrisi, p. 13.]

[Footnote 168: Ib. p. 16.]

[Footnote 169: It appears that a report of the same kind was
communicated to Mr. Beaufoy; namely, that a branch of the _Egyptian_
Nile _runs into_ the Desert of Bilma. (Af. Assoc. Q. p. 138:
O. p. 209.) There does not, however, appear to be any foundation
for believing that the Nile sends forth any branch above Egypt. All
the notices of this kind may with more probability, be referred to
a communication with the waters of _Kauga_.]

[Footnote 170: Mém. Inscrip. Vol. xxvi. p. 66.]

[Footnote 171: Page 2. 255.]

[Footnote 172: Af. Assoc. 1790, ch. xii.]




                              CHAPTER VII.                              

_Observations on the_ physical _and_ political _Geography of North
Africa — Naturally divisible into three Parts — Productive in
Gold — Boundary of the Moors and Negroes — the Foulahs, the_
Leucæthiopes _of the Ancients._


To our view, North Africa appears to be composed of three distinct
parts or members. The FIRST and smallest is a fertile region along the
Mediterranean, lying opposite to Spain, France, and Italy (commonly
distinguished by the name of Barbary); and which, could we suppose
the western bason of the Mediterranean to have once been _dry land_,
(bating a lake or recipient for the surrounding rivers), might be
regarded as a part of Europe; as possessing much more of the European,
than the African character.

The SECOND part is what may be deemed the _body_ of North Africa,
comprized between the Red Sea, and Cape Verd, on the east and
west; and having the Great Desert (or _Sahara_) and its members,
on the north; the Ethiopic ocean, and South Africa, on the opposite
side. The prominent feature of this immense region, is a vast _belt of
elevated land_, of great breadth, often swelling into lofty mountains,
and running generally from west to east, about the tenth degree of
latitude. Its western extremity seems to be C. Verd; the mountains of
Abyssinia, the eastern. To the north, its ramifications are neither
numerous, nor extensive, if we except the elevated tract which turns
the Nile to the northward, beyond Abyssinia. Towards the south,
no particulars are known, save that a multitude of rivers, some of
them very large, descend from that side, and join the Atlantic and
Ethiopic seas, from the Rio Grande on the west, to Cape Lopez on the
east; proving incontestably that by far the greatest proportion of
rain water falls on that side, during the periodical season of the
SW winds; which corresponds in all its circumstances with the same
monsoon in India.[173]

To the north of this belt, with the exception of the Egyptian Nile,
the waters conform generally to the direction of the high land;
passing at no great distance (comparatively) from its base, to the
right and left: as if the surface of the Sahara had a general dip to
the southward.[174] These rivers, moreover, receive all their supplies
from the south; no streams of any bulk being collected in the Desert.

In order to produce this effect, there must necessarily be a vast
hollow in the interior of Africa, between the high land of Nubia on the
east, and Manding on the west; and of which the mountains and Desert
form the other two sides. Nor is this state of things unexampled
in the other continents. In Asia, the _hollow_, to whose waters the
Caspian and Aral serve as recipients, is no less extensive than the
one just mentioned; reckoning from the sources of the Wolga to those
of the Oxus; (which latter has ever communicated with the Caspian,
either throughout the year, or during a part of it:) the difference is,
that in Asia, a greater portion of the hollow is filled up with water,
than in Africa.

The THIRD part is of course, the Great Desert (or Sahara), and its
members; consisting of the lesser deserts of Bornou, Bilma, Barca,
Sort, &c. This may be considered as an OCEAN OF SAND,[175] presenting a
surface equal in extent to about _one half of Europe_, and having its
gulfs, and bays; as also its islands, fertile in groves and pastures,
and in many instances containing a great population, subject to order
and regular government. The great body, or _western_ division of this
OCEAN, comprized between Fezzan and the Atlantic, is no less than
50 caravan journies across, from north to south; or from 750 to 800
G. miles; and double that extent, in length: without doubt the largest
desert in the world. This division contains but a scanty portion of
islands (or oases) and those also of small extent: but the eastern
division has many; and some of them very large. Fezzan, Gadamis,
Taboo, Ghanat, Agadez, Augela, Berdoa, are amongst the principal ones:
besides which, there are a vast number of small ones. In effect,
this is the part of Africa alluded to by Strabo,[176] when he says
from _Cneius Piso_, that Africa may be compared to a leopard’s
skin. I conceive the reason why the oases are more common here,
than in the west, is, that the _stratum_ of sand is _shallower_, from
_its_ surface, to that of the earth which it covers. In other words,
that the water contained in that earth, is nearer to the surface;
as in most of the oases it springs up spontaneously.[177] Can any
part of the cause be assigned to the prevalent easterly winds, which,
by driving the finer particles of sand to leeward, may have heaped
it up to a higher level in the Sahara, than elsewhere?[178]

The springs, no doubt, have _produced_ the oases themselves, by
enabling useful vegetables to flourish, and consequently population
to be established. That the Desert has a _dip_ towards the east,
as well as the south, seems to be proved by the course of the Niger,
also. Moreover, the highest points of North Africa, that is to say,
the mountains of Mandinga and Atlas, are situated very far to the west.

The Desert, for the most part, abounds with salt. But we hear of salt
_mines_ only, in the part contiguous to Nigritia, from whence salt
is drawn for the use of those countries, as well as of the Moorish
states adjoining; there being no salt in the Negro countries south
of the Niger.[179] There are salt _lakes_ also, in the eastern part
of the Desert.

The great ridge of mountains, and its branches, are very productive in
_gold_; but more particularly in the quarters opposite to Manding and
Bambouk on the west, and Wangara, on the east. It may perhaps admit
of a doubt, whether the gold is brought down at the present time, by
the numerous fountains that form the heads of the Niger and Senegal
rivers; or whether it has been deposited in the lower parts of their
beds, at an earlier period of the world; and that the search, instead
of being facilitated by the periodical floods, is, on the contrary,
only to be pursued with effect, when the waters are low.

Tombuctoo is reckoned the mart of the Mandinga gold, from whence
it is distributed over the northern quarters of Africa, by the
merchants of Tunis, Tripoly, Fezzan, and Morocco; all of whom resort
to Tombuctoo. Most of it, no doubt, afterwards finds its way into
Europe. It may be remarked, also, that the _Gold Coast_ of Guinea (so
called, doubtless, from its being the place of traffic for gold dust),
is situated nearly opposite to Manding: but whether the gold brought
thither, has been washed out of the mountains, by the _northern_
or _southern_ streams, I know not: it may be by both; for a part of
the gold of Wangara is brought for sale to the southern coast.[180]
Degombah, another country, said to be very productive in gold,[181]
must, by its situation, lie directly opposite to the Gold Coast: for
it lies immediately to the east of Kong (the Gonjah of Mr. Beaufoy, and
the Conche of D’Anville).[182] The people of Fezzan trade to Kong.

The triangular hilly tract above commemorated, (p. xix.) which projects
northward from the highest part of the belt, and contains Manding,
Bambouk, &c. is also abundant in gold; particularly in the quarter
towards Bambouk, where it is found in mines; and that chiefly in the
middle level.[183] (See also, p. xix.)

Wangara appears to have been, in its time, nearly as rich as Manding
in this metal. The Arabs name it _Belad al Tebr_, or the _country
of gold_.[184] Edrisi, Ibn al Wardi, and Leo, bear testimony to
its riches. They say that the gold is found in the sands, after the
periodical inundation of the Niger (which is general over the country)
is abated.[185] Leo, alone,[186] says, that the gold is found in the
_southern_ quarter of the kingdom; which appears very probable, as the
mountains lie on that side: so that it may be concluded, that the gold
sand has not been brought there by the Niger, but by smaller rivers
that descend immediately from those mountains. That a part of Wangara
is bounded by mountains, we learn from Edrisi: for the lake on which
Reghebil stands, has mountains hanging over its southern shore.[187]

It is supposed that most of the countries bordering on these
mountains, share in the riches contained within them, by means of
the rivulets.[188] But considering how amazingly productive in gold,
the streams of this region are, it is wonderful that Pliny should
not mention the Niger amongst the rivers that roll down golden sands:
for although he speaks of the Tagus and others, in different quarters,
no African river is mentioned.[189] And yet Herodotus knew that the
Carthaginians bartered their goods for gold, with the Africans on
the sea coast, beyond the Pillars of Hercules: which was contrived
without the parties seeing each other.[190]

The common boundary of the MOORS and NEGROES, in Africa, forms
a striking feature, as well in the moral, as the political and
physical, geography of this continent. The Moors, descendants of Arabs,
intermixed with the various colonists of Africa, from the earliest to
the latest times, overspread the habitable parts of the Desert, and the
oases within it: and have pushed their conquests and establishments
southward; pressing on the Negro aborigines, who have in several
instances retired to the southward of the great rivers; but in others,
preserve their footing on the side towards the Desert; according to
the strength, or openness of the situation. It is probable, however,
that the Negroes, who are an agricultural people, never possessed any
_considerable_ portion of the Desert, which is so much better suited
to the pastoral life of the Moors. It appears as if matters had not
undergone much change in this respect, since the days of Herodotus; who
fixes the boundary of the LIBYANS and ETHIOPIANS, in other words, of
the MOORS and NEGROES, near the borders of the Niger; and he apparently
pointed to the quarter in which Kassina or Ghana are now situated.[191]

The Negroes in the western quarter of the continent, are of two
distinct races, of which the least numerous are named FOULAHS,
or FOOLAHS. These, although they partake much of the Negro form
and complexion, have neither their _jetty_ colour, _thick lips_, or
_crisped_ hair. They have also a language distinct from the Mandinga,
which is the prevailing one, in this quarter.

The original country of the Foulahs is said to be a tract of no
great extent along the eastern branch of the Senegal river; situated
between Manding and Kasson; Bambouk and Kaarta: and which bears
the name of FOOLA-DOO, or the country of the Foulahs. But whether
this be really the case, or whether they might not have come from
the country within Serra Leona (called also the _Foulah_ country),
may be a question; of which, more in the sequel. The Foulahs occupy,
at least as sovereigns, several provinces or kingdoms, interspersed
throughout the tract, comprehended between the mountainous border of
the country of Serra Leona, on the west, and that of Tombuctoo, on the
east; as also, a large tract on the lower part of the Senegal river:
and these provinces are insulated from each other in a very remarkable
manner. Their religion is Mahomedanism, but with a great mixture of
Paganism; and with less intolerance than is practiced by the Moors.

The principal of the Foulah States, is that within Serra Leona; and
of which Teemboo is the capital. The next, in order, appears to be
that bordering on the south of the Senegal river, and on the Jaloffs:
and which is properly named Siratik. Others of less note, are Bondou,
with Foota-Torra, adjacent to it, lying between the rivers Gambia and
Falemé; Foola-doo, and Brooko, along the upper part of the Senegal
river; Wassela, beyond the upper part of the Niger; and Massina,
lower down on the same river, and joining to Tombuctoo on the west.

The Moors have in very few instances, established themselves on the
south of the great rivers. They have advanced _farthest_ to the _south_
in the western quarter of Africa; so that the common boundary of the
two races, passes, in respect of the parallels on the globe, with a
considerable degree of obliquity, to the north, in its way from the
river Senegal towards Nubia, and the Nile.[192] Mr. Park arranges the
Moorish States which form the _frontier_ towards Nigritia, together
with the Negro states opposed to them, on the south, in the line of
his progress, in the following order:

The small Moorish state of Gedumah, situated on the north bank of the
Senegal river, and the last that touches on it,[193] is opposed to the
small Negro kingdom of Kajaaga, on the south. This latter occupies
the extremity of the navigable course of the Senegal, terminated in
this place, by the cataract of F’low.

From this point, the Negro and Foulah states occupy _both_ banks of
the Senegal river, to its source: and beyond that, _both_ banks of
the Niger (or Joliba) likewise, to the lake Dibbie, situated beyond
the term of Mr. Park’s expedition. This space is divided, unequally,
between Kasson, a hilly strong country, but of small extent; and which
has the Moors of Jaffnoo on the north: Kaarta, a considerable state,
which has Ludamar for its opposite (a country held by Ali, a Moorish
prince, who is loaded with infamy, on the score of maltreatment of the
only two Europeans, who appear to have entered his country, in latter
times): Bambara, of still more consideration, which has on the north,
the Moorish kingdom of Beeroo, and Massina, a Foulah state.

Here Mr. Park’s personal knowledge ends; but he learnt that Tombuctoo
and Houssa, which succeed in order, to Massina, and occupy both sides
of the Niger, are Moorish states, though with the greatest proportion
of Negro subjects: so that the river may be considered as the boundary
of the two races in this quarter.[194]

Of the countries between Houssa and Kassina we are ignorant. The
Desert seems to approach very near the river (Niger) in that quarter,
whence a Moorish population may be inferred. South of the river,
we hear of Kaffaba, Gago, and other Negro countries; but without any
distinct notices of position; and beyond these, Melli.

Kassina and Bornou, two great empires on the north of the river,
appear to divide the largest portion of the remaining space, to the
borders of Nubia; and extend a great way to the north; this region
being composed of Desert and habitable country, intermixed; but
perhaps, containing the largest proportion of the latter. In both
these empires, the sovereigns are Mahomedans, but the bulk of their
subjects are said to adhere to their ancient worship; that is to say,
the lower orders are, almost universally, Negroes.[195]

From what has appeared, perhaps the boundary of Nigritia, as it
respects the Negro population, may be expressed generally, and with a
few exceptions, as follows: beginning from the west, the extent upwards
of the navigable course of the Senegal river, generally—thence,
a line drawn to Silla; from Silla to Tombuctoo, Houssa, and Berissa,
along the river Niger; and thence through Asouda, Kanem, and Kuku,
to Dongola, on the Nile.

Leo,[196] enumerates 12 states, or kingdoms of Nigritia: but amongst
these, he includes Gualata, a tract only 300 miles S of the river Nun:
as also, Cano (Ganat), adjacent to Fezzan; and Nubia. Kassina, Bornou,
and Tombuctoo, are included, of course.[197]

The kingdom of the Foulahs before mentioned, situated between
the upper part of the Gambia river, and the coast of Serra Leona,
and along the Rio Grande, has also a Mahomedan sovereign, but the
bulk of the people appear to be of the ancient religion. It has been
already said, that although they are a black people, they are less
black than the Negroes, generally, and have neither crisped hair,
nor thick lips: as also that they have a language distinct from the
Mandinga. From these circumstances, added to that of situation, they
appear clearly to be the _Leucæthiopes_ of Ptolemy and Pliny. The
former places them in the situation occupied by the Foulahs; that is,
in the parallel of 9 degrees north; having to the north, the mountains
of _Ryssadius_, which separate the courses of the _Stachir_ and _Nia_
rivers (Gambia and Rio Grande), and which therefore answer to the
continuation of the great belt of high land, in our geography; in
which there is, moreover, another point of agreement, the _Caphas_
of Ptolemy, being the _Caffaba_ of the map.[198]

Ptolemy, by the name, evidently meant to describe a people _less_
black than the generality of the _Ethiopians_; and hence it may
be gathered, that this nation had been traded with, and that some
notices respecting it, had been communicated to him. It may also be
remarked, that the navigation of HANNO, terminated on this coast;
probably at Sherbro’ river, or sound. And as this was also the
term of the knowledge of Ptolemy, it may be justly suspected that
this part of the coast was described from Carthaginian materials.[199]

Those who have perused the Journal of Messrs. Watt and Winterbottom,
through the Foulah country, in 1794, and recollect how flattering a
picture they give of the urbanity and hospitality of the Foulahs, will
be gratified on finding that this nation was known and distinguished
from the rest of the Ethiopians, at a remote period of antiquity.[200]

The contrast between the Moorish and Negro characters, is as great,
as that between the nature of their respective countries; or between
their form and complexion. The Moors appear to possess the vices
of the Arabs, without their virtues; and to avail themselves of
an intolerant religion, to oppress strangers: whilst the Negroes,
and especially the Mandingas, unable to comprehend a doctrine, that
substitutes opinion or belief, for the social duties, are content
to remain in their humble state of ignorance. The hospitality shewn
by these good people to Mr. Park, a destitute and forlorn stranger,
raises them very high in the scale of humanity: and I know of no
fitter title to confer on them, than that of the HINDOOS of AFRICA:
at the same time, by no means intending to degrade the MAHOMEDANS of
INDIA, by a comparison with the AFRICAN MOORS.


                                THE END.                                


[Footnote 173: A ridge stretches to the south, through the middle
of South Africa, and forms an impenetrable barrier between the two
coasts. M. CORREA DE SERRA informs me, that the Portugueze in Congo
and Angola, have never been able to penetrate to the coast of the
Indian ocean.

Mr. Bruce learnt (Vol. iii. p. 668.) that a high chain of mountains
from 6° runs southward through the middle of Africa. He supposes
the gold of Sofala to be drawn from these mountains. (p. 669.)]

[Footnote 174: Circumstances have shewn, that it declines to the
eastward also.]

[Footnote 175: “A wild expanse of lifeless sand and sky!” _Thomson._]

[Footnote 176: Page 130.]

[Footnote 177: Water is found at the depth of a few feet, in
Fezzan (Afr. Assoc. Q. p. 96: O. p. 146). The same is said by Pliny,
concerning this quarter of Africa; lib. v. c. 5. But farther to the NW,
on the edge of the Desert, and in the country of Wadreag in particular
(Shaw, p. 135.), wells are dug to an amazing depth, and water mixed
with fine sand, springs up suddenly, and sometimes fatally to the
workmen. The Doctor tells us, that the people call this abyss of
sand and water, “the sea below ground.” Exactly the same state
of things exists in the country round London, where the sand has
in several cases nearly filled up the wells. (See Phil. Trans. for
1797.) The famous well lately dug by EARL SPENCER (at Wimbledon), of
more than 560 feet in depth, has several hundred feet of sand in it.]

[Footnote 178: Ships that have sailed at a great distance from the
African coast, opposite to C. Blanco and C. Bojador, have had their
rigging filled with fine sand, when the wind blew strong off shore. The
accumulation of the _Bissago_ shoals may have been partly owing to
this cause also. They occupy the position where a great eddy of the
general southerly current takes place, between C. Verd and Sherbro’.]

[Footnote 179: This quality of the African Desert was familiarly known
to Herodotus (Melpom. c. 181, _et seq._) He knew also that there was
salt in abundance in the _northern_ parts. But as it would appear that
the inhabitants in that quarter can furnish themselves with salt of
a better quality from the sea, the mines are not wrought.]

[Footnote 180: Some writers have said, that there are gold _mines_
in the neighbourhood of Mina, on the Gold Coast; others, that the gold
is rolled down by the rivers to that neighbourhood. Both may be true.

It is difficult to conceive any other adequate cause, than the exchange
of the gold of the inland countries, for the introduction of so vast a
quantity of _kowry_ shells, which are carried from Europe to the Coast
of Guinea, and pass for small money in the countries along the Niger,
from Bambara to Kassina, both inclusive.

I am informed from authority, that about 100 tons of kowries are
annually shipped from England alone, to Guinea. These are originally
imported from the Maldive islands into Bengal; and from Bengal into
England. In Bengal, 2400, more or less, are equal to a shilling:
and yet notwithstanding the incredible smallness of the denomination,
some article in the market may be purchased for a single kowry. But in
the inland parts of Africa, they are about ten times as dear; varying
from 220 to 280. Mr. Beaufoy was told that in Kassina, they were at
the rate of about 250: and Mr. Park reports, that they are about the
same price at Sego: but _cheaper_ at Tombuctoo, which is about the
_centre_ of the kowry country; _dearer_ towards Manding, which is
the western extremity of it. Hence they are probably carried in the
first instance to Tombuctoo, the gold market: and thence distributed
to the east and west. Their circulation seems to be confined between
Bornou and Manding. In Bournou they have a coinage of base metal.]

[Footnote 181: African Assoc. Q. p. 176: O. p. 264.]

[Footnote 182: Mr. Park says that Kong signifies _mountain_, in the
Mandinga language; which language is in use from the frontier of
Bambara, to the western sea.]

[Footnote 183: Labat, Vol. iv. ch. 2.]

[Footnote 184: Bakui, and Herbelot; article Vankara.]

[Footnote 185: See Edrisi in particular, pages 11 and 12.]

[Footnote 186: Page 254.]

[Footnote 187: Edrisi, page 12.]

[Footnote 188: Mr. Bruce, Vol. iii. p. 647, says the same of the
mountains of Dyre and Tegla, which are a continuation of the great
belt, towards Abyssinia.]

[Footnote 189: Pliny, lib. xxxiii. c. 4.]

[Footnote 190: Melpomene, c. 196.

Dr. Shaw (p. 302) speaks of the same mode of traffic, at present,
between the Moors and Negroes: whence the place of traffic ought to
be very far removed from the Mediterranean. There is a similar story
related by Cadamosta of the exchange of salt for gold, in Melli;
and by Dr. Wadstrom on the windward coast of Guinea.]

[Footnote 191: See Euterpe, c. 32.; and Melpomene, c. 197.]

[Footnote 192: The common boundary of the Moors and Negroes, in the
map of Mr. Park’s route, is described by a blue line.]

[Footnote 193: The Moors appear to be masters of the northern bank
of the Senegal through the greatest part of its navigable course:
the Foulahs of the southern bank.]

[Footnote 194: The Emperor of Morocco is said to have held, at one
period, the sovereignty of some of the countries on the northern
banks of the Senegal and Niger rivers. Labat, Vol. iii. p. 339,
speaks of incursions made by his troops.]

[Footnote 195: Af. Assoc. Q. p. 126: O. p. 191.]

[Footnote 196: Page 4.]

[Footnote 197: The Arabs and Moors, call NIGRITIA by the general
name of SOUDAN. By _Belad Soudan_, or the country of Soudan,
Abulfeda includes all the known part of Africa, south of the Great
Desert, and Egypt. With him, Soudan is the southern quarter of the
globe. D’Herbelot also allows it a wide range. _Affnoo_ is another
term for Nigritia, in use amongst the natives themselves. (See also
Proceedings Af. Assoc. Q. p. 164: O. p. 246.)]

[Footnote 198: The _Soluentii_ of Ptolemy may also be meant for the
_Solimani_ of Mr. Park.]

[Footnote 199: And it may also have been the scene of the traffic
mentioned in page lxxxvii; as Dr. Wadstrom speaks of such a custom
in this quarter, at the present day.]

[Footnote 200: Pliny (lib. v. c. 8.) also speaks of the
_Leucæthiopes_, but seems to place them on _this side_ of
Nigritia. May it not be, that certain tribes of Foulahs were then
established, as at present, along the Senegal river!]




                              POSTSCRIPT.                               


The incident of the Negro Song, related in the 15th Chapter of this
work (p. 198), having been communicated to a Lady, who is not more
distinguished for her rank, than for her beauty and accomplishments;
she was pleased to think so highly of this simple and unpremeditated
effusion, as to make a version of it with her own pen; and cause it to
be set to music by an eminent Composer. With this elegant production,
in both parts of which the plaintive simplicity of the original is
preserved and improved, the Author thinks himself highly honoured in
being permitted to adorn his book; and he laments only that he had
not an opportunity of inserting it in its proper place in the body
of the work.


                             A NEGRO SONG,                              
                        FROM MR. PARK’S TRAVELS.                        
                               * * * * *                                


                 I.

  The loud wind roar’d, the rain fell fast;

  The White Man yielded to the blast:

  He sat him down, beneath our tree;

  For weary, sad, and faint was he;

  And ah, no wife, or mother’s care,

  For him, the milk or corn prepare:


              CHORUS.

  _The White Man, shall our pity share;_

  _Alas, no wife or mother’s care,_

  _For him, the milk or corn prepare._


                II.

  The storm is o’er; the tempest past;

  And Mercy’s voice has hush’d the blast.

  The wind is heard in whispers low;

  The White Man, far away must go;—

  But ever in his heart will bear

  Remembrance of the Negro’s care.


             CHORUS.

  _Go, White Man, go;—but with thee bear_

  _The Negro’s wish, the Negro’s prayer;_

  _Remembrance of the Negro’s care._


[Music sheet: _SONG_ from Mr. Park’s Travels

_The Words by the Dutchess of Devonshire._

_The Music by G. G. Ferrari._]




Transcriber's note:


  Changes in the ERRATA have been made.

  pg 22 Changed: "dwelling houses the Mandigoes" to: "Mandingoes"

  pg 34 Changed: "inhabitants are Mandigoes" to: "Mandingoes"

  pg 39 Changed: "under all the cirumstances" to: "circumstances"

  pg 98 Changed: "_Some Particu-culars concerning_" to: "_Particulars_"

  pg 138 Changed: "compel me, though a Christain" to: "Christian"

  pg 162 Changed: "(said he); “the boy" to: "(said he); the boy"

  pg 172 Changed: "one way or the the other" to: "one way or the other"

  pg 282 Changed: "aquired the proper shade" to: "acquired"

  pg xvii (footnote a below ftn. 50) Changed: "arrangement of th
  matter" to: "the"

  pg xli Changed: "50 journies of he caravan" to: "the"

  pg lviii (footnote 103) Changed: "Af. Assos." to: "Assoc."

  pg lxv Changed: "means Barbary, call" to: "means Barbary) call"

  pg lxxvi Changed: "may be proper to oberve" to: "observe"

  pg lxxx Changed: "his decription of the rivers" to: "description"

  Other spelling inconsistencies have been left unchanged.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74976 ***
